HeatWatch: Improving 3D NAND Flash Memory Device Reliability
by Exploiting Self-Recovery and Temperature Awareness
Yixin Luo†
Saugata Ghose†
Yu Cai†
Erich F. Haratsch‡
Onur Mutlu§†
† Carnegie Mellon University
‡ Seagate Technology
§ ETH Zürich
latency compared to magnetic disk drives. As applications
become more data intensive, the need for greater NAND flash
memory density grows, to reduce the cost-per-bit of SSD
storage. In the past decade, planar (i.e., 2D) NAND flash
memory density has increased by more than 1000×, as a
result of (1) aggressive manufacturing process technology
scaling and (2) multi-level cell technology. Manufacturers
have shrunk the planar NAND flash memory manufacturing process technology from 70 nm to 1X-nm (i.e., 15–19 nm)
over the last decade [67], which has greatly decreased the
size of each flash cell. At the same time, manufacturers use
multi-level cell (MLC) and triple-level cell (TLC) technology
to store more data in each cell [4, 5]. Older single-level cell
(SLC) NAND flash memory stores a single bit of data per
cell, while MLC and TLC NAND flash memory store two
and three bits of data, respectively, per cell. Recently, manufacturers have turned to 3D integration to further increase
the density of NAND flash memory by stacking flash memory cells vertically. State-of-the-art 3D NAND flash memory
chips integrate 48–96 vertically-stacked layers of NAND flash
memory [23, 34, 36, 54, 61, 66].
This rapid increase in NAND flash memory density has
come at the cost of reduced reliability [4, 5, 11, 44, 50, 58].
NAND flash memory has a limited lifetime, which is defined
as the number of program and erase operations (known as P/E
cycles) that can be reliably performed on each flash cell while
avoiding data loss for a minimum data retention time as guaranteed by vendors [4, 5, 11]. As the manufacturing process
technology scales, the lifetime has reduced from 10,000 P/E
cycles for 70 nm planar NAND flash memory to only 2,000
P/E cycles for a state-of-the-art 1X-nm planar NAND flash
memory [67]. While 3D NAND flash memory currently has
a higher lifetime than state-of-the-art planar NAND flash
memory (e.g., 35,000 P/E cycles for 24-layer 3D MLC NAND),
thanks to its use of a larger process technology node, its
lifetime is expected to decrease in the future as manufacturers increase 3D NAND flash memory density more aggressively [4, 5, 26, 57].
The limited lifetime is a result of wearout that occurs as
a flash cell is repeatedly programmed and erased. A flash
cell consists of a transistor that can hold charge, where the
amount of charge determines the threshold voltage at which
the transistor turns on. The threshold voltage of the transistor is used to represent the data value stored within the cell.
Unfortunately, after each additional P/E cycle, a greater number of electrons get inadvertently trapped within the flash cell,
which changes the threshold voltage of the transistor [4, 5].
This threshold voltage change introduces errors and, thus, reduces the flash lifetime. Some of these inadvertently-trapped
electrons gradually escape during the idle time between consecutive P/E cycles, i.e., the dwell time. The escape (i.e., detrapping) of the inadvertently-trapped electrons is known as

NAND flash memory density continues to scale to keep up
with the increasing storage demands of data-intensive applications. Unfortunately, as a result of this scaling, the lifetime of
NAND flash memory has been decreasing. Each cell in NAND
flash memory can endure only a limited number of writes, due
to the damage caused by each program and erase operation on
the cell. This damage can be partially repaired on its own during
the idle time between program or erase operations (known as
the dwell time), via a phenomenon known as the self-recovery
effect. Prior works study the self-recovery effect for planar (i.e.,
2D) NAND flash memory, and propose to exploit it to improve
flash lifetime, by applying high temperature to accelerate selfrecovery. However, these findings may not be directly applicable
to 3D NAND flash memory, due to significant changes in the
design and manufacturing process that are required to enable
practical 3D stacking for NAND flash memory.
In this paper, we perform the first detailed experimental
characterization of the effects of self-recovery and temperature
on real, state-of-the-art 3D NAND flash memory devices. We
show that these effects influence two major factors of NAND
flash memory reliability: (1) retention loss speed (i.e., the
speed at which a flash cell leaks charge), and (2) program
variation (i.e., the difference in programming speed across flash
cells). We find that self-recovery and temperature affect 3D
NAND flash memory quite differently than they affect planar
NAND flash memory, rendering prior models of self-recovery
and temperature ineffective for 3D NAND flash memory. Using
our characterization results, we develop a new model for 3D
NAND flash memory reliability, which predicts how retention,
wearout, self-recovery, and temperature affect raw bit error
rates and cell threshold voltages. We show that our model is
accurate, with an error of only 4.9%.
Based on our experimental findings and our model, we propose HeatWatch, a new mechanism to improve 3D NAND flash
memory reliability. The key idea of HeatWatch is to optimize
the read reference voltage, i.e., the voltage applied to the cell
during a read operation, by adapting it to the dwell time of the
workload and the current operating temperature. HeatWatch
(1) efficiently tracks flash memory temperature and dwell time
online, (2) sends this information to our reliability model to
predict the current voltages of flash cells, and (3) predicts the
optimal read reference voltage based on the current cell voltages.
Our detailed experimental evaluations show that HeatWatch
improves flash lifetime by 3.85× over a baseline that uses a
fixed read reference voltage, averaged across 28 real storage
workload traces, and comes within 0.9% of the lifetime of an
ideal read reference voltage selection mechanism.

1. Introduction
In many modern servers and mobile devices, solid-state
drives (SSDs) containing NAND flash memory are used as
the primary persistent storage media, due to their low access
1

the self-recovery effect [46], as it partially undoes (i.e., repairs)
the wearout of the cell. Prior works show that self-recovery
can be accelerated by applying a high temperature to the
flash cell during the dwell time [46], and propose to use this
relationship to improve the lifetime of planar NAND flash
memory [17, 64, 65].
While these proposals to exploit self-recovery and temperature effects are promising, they have two major shortcomings:
they (1) do not demonstrate whether self-recovery mechanisms can practically reduce the effects of wearout on real
NAND flash devices, (2) do not account for the design and
manufacturing changes made for 3D NAND flash memory.
3D NAND flash memory cells predominantly use a different
type of transistor (charge trap transistor) [5, 16, 22, 62] from
planar NAND flash memory cells (floating-gate transistor),
and require new manufacturing process technologies to successfully stack multiple dies within a chip [47,54]. As a result,
the observations and conclusions drawn for self-recovery
in planar NAND flash memory may not be accurate for 3D
NAND flash memory. Our goal is to (1) perform the first
detailed experimental characterization of the effects of selfrecovery and temperature on real, state-of-the-art 3D NAND
flash memory devices, and (2) exploit our experimental findings by developing new mechanisms to improve the lifetime
of 3D NAND flash memory.
We extensively characterize how self-recovery and temperature affect two major aspects of 3D NAND flash memory
reliability: (1) retention loss and (2) program variation. Retention loss refers to the leakage of charge from a flash cell that
contains valid data, which can introduce retention errors into
the data [4,5,8,9,10,40]. As a flash cell becomes more worn out,
a greater number of electrons that are inadvertently trapped
in the cell cause the cell’s retention loss speed (i.e., the rate at
which charge leaks from the cell) to increase [19,45]. Program
variation refers to random variations that occur when a cell
is being programmed to a target threshold voltage, which can
cause the cell to be set to an incorrect voltage. The resulting
errors are called program variation errors [4,5,12,41,45,53,55].
As a flash cell becomes more worn out, a greater number of
electrons that get inadvertently trapped in the cell cause the
cell’s programming speed (i.e., the rate at which the threshold
voltage of a cell increases during a programming operation)
to change [63], increasing program variation errors.
We make four key empirical findings on retention loss and
program variation from our experimental characterization of
self-recovery and temperature effects on real 3D NAND flash
memory chips from a major manufacturer:
1. Increasing dwell time from 1 min to 137 min slows down
retention loss by 40% (Section 3.2).
2. Lowering the temperature from 70 ◦C to 0 ◦C slows down
retention loss by 58% (Section 3.3).
3. Increasing the temperature from 0 ◦C to 70 ◦C during programming increases the program variation by 21% (Section 3.3).
4. The effectiveness of self-recovery (i.e., the number of electrons that are successfully detrapped) is correlated with
the dwell time experienced during the 20 most recent P/E
cycles (Section 3.4).
Based on the results from our characterization, we find that
prior models and model parameters for planar NAND flash

memory [46] are not accurate enough for 3D NAND flash
memory. We use our characterization findings to construct a
new unified model of self-recovery, temperature, retention
loss, and wearout for 3D NAND flash memory, called Unified Recovery and Temperature (URT). URT consists of three
components, which model (1) the impact of temperature and
wearout on program variation; (2) the impact of temperature
on data retention and self-recovery; and (3) the impact of time,
wearout, and self-recovery on retention loss. URT combines
these three components to accurately predict how changes
in retention loss speed and program variation affect the raw
bit error rate and cell threshold voltages. We find that URT is
highly accurate, with a prediction error of only 4.9%.
Using URT, we develop HeatWatch, a new mechanism that
exploits self-recovery and operating temperature information
to improve the reliability of read operations and thus increase
the lifetime of 3D NAND flash memory. HeatWatch efficiently
tracks the amount of dwell time experienced (which depends
on the storage access patterns of a workload) by each cell,
the operating temperature of the memory device, and the
retention time of data at runtime, requiring less than 1.6 MB
of storage overhead within the SSD controller. Our mechanism uses the tracked information as inputs to URT, which
accurately predicts and applies the best (i.e., optimal) read
reference voltage to use for each read operation. This predicted optimal read reference voltage accounts for threshold
voltage changes in the flash cells, reducing the number of raw
bit errors in the data that is read from NAND flash memory.
On average across a wide range of workloads, HeatWatch
improves the overall lifetime of 3D NAND flash memory by
3.85× compared to a baseline that uses a fixed read reference
voltage, and comes within 0.9% of the lifetime provided by
an ideal read reference voltage selection mechanism.
We make the following key contributions:
• Using real, state-of-the-art 3D charge trap NAND flash
chips from a major vendor, we experimentally characterize
the effects of self-recovery and temperature on retention
loss speed and program variation. We show that 3D NAND
flash memory exhibits different self-recovery and temperature effects than planar NAND flash memory.
• Based on our experimental characterization data, we construct URT, a unified model for retention loss, wearout,
self-recovery, and temperature in 3D NAND flash memory. Our model quantifies these four effects to accurately
predict the raw bit error rate and threshold voltage shift.
• We propose HeatWatch, a mechanism for 3D NAND flash
memory that improves flash reliability and lifetime. HeatWatch (1) tracks the temperature, dwell time, and retention
time online, and (2) sends this information to URT to accurately predict the optimal read reference voltage. By using
the predicted optimal read reference voltage for flash read
operations, HeatWatch reduces the raw bit error rate by
93.5%, and improves flash lifetime by 3.85×, over a baseline
that uses a fixed read reference voltage.

2. Background
In this section, we provide necessary background on 3D
NAND flash memory, NAND flash memory errors, and the
self-recovery effect. A more detailed background is in [4, 5].
2

stored in a cell, the flash controller applies Vb to the cell
control gate to determine whether the LSB is a 0 (Vth > Vb )
or a 1 (Vth < Vb ). To read the MSB stored in a cell, the flash
controller first applies Va , and then applies Vc , to the cell
control gate, to determine whether the MSB is a 0 (Va <
Vth < Vc ) or a 1 (Vth < Va or Vth > Vc ).

2.1. NAND Flash Memory Design and Operation
Flash Cell. NAND flash memory consists of multiple arrays of flash cells, where each cell stores a unit of data in
the form of electric charge. In the majority of 3D NAND
flash memory devices available today, a flash cell consists
of a charge trap transistor [16, 22, 62].1 Figure 1a shows the
cross-section of a charge trap transistor in 3D NAND flash
memory. The cylindrical substrate sits in the middle of the
cell. One end of the substrate acts as the transistor source,
and the other end acts as the transistor drain. There are three
layers that wrap around the substrate: the tunnel oxide, the
charge trap layer, and the gate oxide. The control gate wraps
around the center of the cell, on top of the gate oxide.
(b)

Substrate

Source

Drain

Charge Trap
(Insulator)

Control Gate
Gate Oxide
Tunnel Oxide

Probability
Density

(a)

Flash Organization. In a NAND flash memory chip, the
cells are divided into multiple cell arrays known as flash blocks.
Each block contains multiple rows of cells, where the control
gates of cells in each row are connected together by a common
wordline. All of the cells belonging to the same wordline are
programmed and read at the same time. Each wordline in
MLC NAND flash memory contains two flash pages, where
the LSBs of all cells in the wordline form the LSB page, and
the MSBs of all cells in the wordline form the MSB page. Each
page is typically 4–16 kB in size. Within a block, all cells in
the same column are connected in series to form a bitline.
In 3D NAND flash memory, each cell on the same bitline
belongs to a different stack layer, and the cells are connected
together by a shared center cylinder (shown in Figure 1a),
which includes the substrate, the charge trap, and oxide. For
more detail on the physical organization of 3D NAND flash
memory, we refer the reader to prior works [5, 21, 35].

MSB

Va
ER
11

Vb
P1
01

LSB

Vc
P2
00

P3
10

Threshold Voltage (Vth)

Figure 1: (a) Cross-sectional view of a 3D charge trap NAND
flash memory cell. (b) Threshold voltage distribution for
MLC NAND flash memory.

When a cell is programmed, charge is stored within the
charge trap to represent data (see Storing and Reading Data
below). The amount of charge stored within the charge trap
changes the threshold voltage (Vth ) of the cell. The flash cell
turns on only if a voltage higher than the threshold voltage
is applied to the control gate of the cell. When the cell turns
on, current flows from the source to the drain.
Storing and Reading Data. In this work, we study multilevel cell (MLC) flash memory. Each multi-level cell stores
two bits of data. To represent the different two-bit values (i.e.,
00, 01, 10, 11), the range of all possible threshold voltages
for the cell is split into four voltage windows, or states, as
shown in Figure 1b. Before data can be programmed to a cell,
the cell must be in the erased (ER) state. The NAND flash
memory device programs a cell using incremental step-pulse
programming (ISPP) [4, 5, 9]. During ISPP, the device repeatedly pulses a high voltage on the cell’s control gate, which
injects additional charge into the charge trap. The pulses continue until the cell reaches its target state. Due to variation
across program operations, the amount of charge injected
during each pulse can differ. As a result, the threshold voltage
of cells programmed to the same state is initially distributed
across the voltage window. We represent the distribution of
flash cells in each state using probability density functions.
To read the value currently stored within a cell, the NAND
flash memory device applies a read reference voltage to the
cell’s control gate. Figure 1b shows the three read reference
voltages (Va , Vb , and Vc ) used to distinguish between the
four states of an MLC NAND flash memory cell. The two
bits stored within a cell are referred to as the least significant
bit (LSB) and the most significant bit (MSB). To read the LSB

2.2. NAND Flash Memory Errors

Probability
Density

Errors can be induced in a NAND flash memory cell by
several error sources, such as data retention [4,5,6,8,9,10,45],
program or erase variation [4, 5, 12, 41, 45, 55], cell-to-cell
program interference [4, 5, 6, 13, 14], and read disturbance [4,
5, 6, 7, 52, 55]. As shown in Figure 2, these errors can shift
the threshold voltage distributions of each state across the
original boundaries of each voltage window. As a result, the
cells at the tail of each distribution are misread when we
apply the originally-assigned read reference voltages (Va , Vb ,
Vc ), leading to raw bit errors.
Va
ER
11

Vb
P1
01

Raw bit errors

Shifted
Original

Vc
P2
00

P3
10
Threshold Voltage (Vth)

Figure 2: Shifted threshold voltage distribution leads to raw
bit errors.

To mitigate the impact of raw bit errors and to avoid
data corruption, flash controllers employ sophisticated errorcorrecting codes (ECC). ECC can correct up to a maximum raw
bit error rate (RBER), known as the error correction capability. As the NAND flash memory is used, the RBER increases,
and eventually exceeds the error correction capability, resulting in data loss (i.e., uncorrectable errors). The lifetime of a
NAND flash memory device is determined by the number of
program and erase (P/E) cycles that can be performed successfully while avoiding data loss for a minimum retention
guarantee (i.e., the minimum amount of time after data has
been written, that the data can still be read out without data
loss). In this paper, we focus on two major sources of errors,
for which self-recovery (see Section 2.3) can potentially lower
the error rate and, thus, extend the flash lifetime: (1) retention
errors and (2) program variation errors.

1 Note that this is different from planar (i.e., 2D) NAND flash memory,
which typically uses a floating-gate transistor [33] as a flash cell. We refer the
reader to prior works [4,5,47,54] for detail on the differences between NAND
flash memory based on charge trap transistors and NAND flash memory
based on floating-gate transistors.

3

Retention errors are errors that are induced by charge
leakage from a programmed flash cell while the cell is idle.
Charge can leak either through the tunnel oxide layer to the
substrate, or through the charge trap layer to a neighboring
cell, as both the tunnel oxide and charge trap are imperfect
insulators. Due to this leakage, the threshold voltage of a
flash cell decreases over time, shifting the threshold voltage
distributions of high-voltage states (i.e., states P1, P2, and P3)
to lower voltages. Over a longer time period, an increasing
fraction of the left tail of each distribution shifts across the
read reference voltages, leading to more raw bit errors.
Program variation errors are errors that are induced by
the random variations present in the flash program operation. In NAND flash memory, cells in the same page are
programmed together. As we discuss in Section 2.1, during
ISPP, a random amount of charge is injected during each
programming pulse, due to variation across programming
operations. When cells are programmed to a certain target
state, their initial threshold voltages are naturally distributed
across the state’s voltage window, as we show in Figure 1b.
A number of factors can increase programming randomness,
which can cause the tail of each threshold voltage distribution to extend across the read reference voltages, leading to
program variation errors.
As more program and erase operations are performed to
a flash cell, the number of retention and program variation
errors increases due to wearout. Wearout is mainly caused
by the electrical stress on the tunnel oxide when a flash cell
is repeatedly programmed and erased. Due to this stress, a
greater amount of charge is inadvertently trapped within the
tunnel oxide. The inadvertently-trapped charge leads to two
problems. First, it can form pathways for the charge stored in
the charge trap layer to leak [8], which increases the speed
of retention loss. Second, the NAND flash memory device
cannot reliably erase a flash cell with inadvertently-trapped
charge [41], and the cell may not always be in the ER state as
a result, which increases program variation.

tion time at high temperature has the same retention loss
effect as a longer retention time at room temperature [8],
which we call the effective retention time. Similarly, a short
dwell time at high temperature has the same self-recovery
effect as a longer dwell time at room temperature [46], called
the effective dwell time. The equivalence between time elapsed
at a certain temperature and the corresponding effective
time at room temperature can be modeled using Arrhenius’
Law [1, 8, 28, 46]:



1
t1
Ea
1
·
AF(T1 , T2 ) =
= exp
–
(1)
t2
kB
T1 T2
In Equation 1, AF is the acceleration factor between t1 and
t2 , where t1 is the retention or dwell time under temperature
T1 , and t2 is the retention or dwell time under temperature T2 .
kB is the Boltzmann constant, which is 8.62 × 10–5 eV/K. Ea
is the activation energy, which is a manufacturing-processdependent constant. For a planar NAND flash memory device,
Ea = 1.1 eV [29]. To our knowledge, there is no public literature that reports the value of Ea for 3D NAND flash memory.

3. Characterizing the Self-Recovery Effect
To understand the behavior of the self-recovery effect in
3D NAND flash memory, we perform an extensive characterization of the effect using real, state-of-the-art 3D NAND
flash memory chips. Our goal in this characterization is to
answer the following research questions:
• How does the dwell time affect retention and program
variation errors?
• What is the correlation between dwell time and the magnitude of the self-recovery effect?
• How does the operating temperature affect the number of
retention and program variation errors?
• How do the benefits of self-recovery change based on the
number of performed recovery cycles?
We make all of our characterization data, including results
not shown in this paper for brevity, available in an extended
report [42] and online [56].
We use the observations and analysis from our characterization to drive the design of a new model of 3D NAND flash
memory reliability, as described in Section 4.

2.3. Self-Recovery
The self-recovery effect repairs the damage caused by flash
wearout during the time between two P/E cycles, by detrapping some of the inadvertently-trapped charge [17, 37, 46,
48, 64, 65]. In this paper, we refer to the delay between consecutive program operations as the dwell time. The amount
of repair done by self-recovery is affected by two factors:
(1) dwell time and (2) operating temperature.
During the dwell time of a flash cell, a fraction of the
charge that was inadvertently trapped in the tunnel oxide
is slowly detrapped [46]. The reduction of inadvertentlytrapped charge in a cell reduces the number of retention and
program variation errors, and thus can extend the NAND
flash memory lifetime. For a fixed retention time, a larger
dwell time reduces the number of retention errors [46]. A recovery cycle refers to a P/E cycle where the program operation
is followed by an extended dwell time. Since 3D NAND flash
memory errors are dominated by retention errors [18, 47, 66],
reducing the retention error rate by performing recovery
cycles can increase flash lifetime significantly.
A higher operating temperature for NAND flash memory
increases electron mobility [8, 46]. As a result, a short reten-

3.1. Characterization Methodology
To answer the above research questions, we design new experiments to test how flash reliability changes with different
dwell times and temperatures. In these experiments, we use
state-of-the-art 30- to 40-layer 3D charge trap NAND flash
chips from a major vendor.2 We use a NAND flash memory
characterization platform that fits in the SSD form factor, and
contains a special version of the firmware in the SSD controller. We use a server machine to issue remote procedure
calls (RPC) [3] to the firmware over a Serial ATA (SATA) [60]
connection. These RPCs trigger commands to be sent directly
to the flash chips, and can transfer the raw data (i.e., data
with raw bit errors) directly from the flash chips to the server
without applying error correction (ECC). This allows us to
2 We do not disclose the exact number of stacked layers in the chips, to
protect the anonymity of the flash vendor, and we cannot disclose the exact
voltage values, as this is proprietary information.

4

observe the effect of dwell time and operating temperature
on the raw bit error rate of each flash chip.
We use two metrics to evaluate flash reliability. First, we
measure the raw bit error rate (RBER), which is the rate at
which errors occur in the data before error correction. To calculate RBER, we read data from a NAND flash memory chip
using the default read reference voltage, and compare the
data using a pristine server-side copy of the data that was
originally written to the chip. Second, we show the statistical mean of the threshold voltage distribution of each highvoltage state (i.e., P1, P2, P3). As we mention in Section 2.2,
retention loss and program variation cause the threshold voltages of cells to shift, which leads to the raw bit errors.3 To
obtain the threshold voltage distribution of a flash page, we
perform multiple read operations to sweep the range of all
positive read reference voltages, using the read-retry command on the NAND flash memory chip [8,12,24].4 Read-retry
allows us to fine-tune the read reference voltage used for each
read operation. The smallest amount by which we can change
the read reference voltage is called a voltage step. We normalize each threshold voltage value to the number of voltage
steps needed to reach that particular voltage value.2
Limitations. In our experiments, we characterize 3D
NAND flash memory chips of the same model from one major vendor. Our approach ensures that any variation that we
observe in our characterization is the result of only manufacturing process variation, and not a result of differences in flash
chip architecture or different manufacturing techniques used
by different vendors. While we do not take vendor-related
variation into account, we believe that our general qualitative
findings on the effects of self-recovery and temperature can
be generalized to 3D charge trap NAND flash memory manufactured by other vendors. This is because the underlying
structure of 3D charge trap cells (see Section 2.1) is similar
across different vendors [18, 47, 54]. Thus, while the exact
numbers reported in this work may differ from vendor to
vendor, our qualitative findings, which are a result of charge
detrapping from the tunnel oxide (see Section 2.3), should be
similar across vendors.
We are unable to perform repeated runs of our test procedures on the same block, as each run of a test procedure
induces further wearout on a block. The amount of wearout
affects the error rate of NAND flash memory [4,5,12,41,45,55].
To ensure an accurate comparison between multiple test procedure runs, we use eight target wordlines in the same stack
layer from eight randomly-selected flash blocks that are set
to the same level of wearout for the same test procedure.
By selecting wordlines in the same layer, we eliminate the
potential impact of cross-layer process variation. Note that
we do not characterize chip-to-chip process variation, as an
accurate study of such variation requires a large-scale study
of a large number (e.g., hundreds) of 3D NAND flash memory
chips, which we do not have access to. Hence, we leave such
a large-scale study for future work.

3.2. Characterizing the Dwell Time Effect
To measure the effect of dwell time on flash reliability (see
Section 2.3), we characterize the RBER and the threshold
voltage distribution. We wear out each of our target blocks
by repeatedly writing pseudorandom data until the block
reaches 3,000 P/E cycles. For the last 300 P/E cycles, we use
a different dwell time for each block, spanning a range of
64–8192 s. Prior work shows that the magnitude of the selfrecovery effect is correlated with the dwell time for only the
last 10% of P/E cycles performed on a block [46]. We show in
Section 3.4 that the dwell time used during only the last 20
P/E cycles affects self-recovery.
We measure how the dwell time affects retention loss speed
and program variation, by performing a retention test on each
target wordline immediately after the block containing the
wordline reaches 3,000 P/E cycles. In this test, we program
pseudorandom data to the target wordline, and repeatedly
measure the threshold voltage distribution using the methodology described in Section 3.1 for up to 71 min (i.e., 4260 s)
after the data was written. We conduct this experiment at
an environmental temperature of 70 ◦C, which accelerates
both self-recovery and retention loss to reduce the experiment duration to a reasonable length [46].5 We later repeat
a small portion of the test under room temperature (20 ◦C),
and verify that all of our observed trends remain the same.
Effect on RBER. First, we study how self-recovery affects
the raw bit error rate. Figure 3 shows the RBER as retention
time (ts ) increases, for different dwell times (td ) used for the
last 300 P/E cycles. We use a color gradient for the curves,
where the reddest (topmost) curve has the shortest dwell time,
and the blackest (bottommost) curve has the longest dwell
time. Note that the x-axis and y-axis are both in log scale.
 ϭ Ϭ

td
td
td
td

 о ϯ

 Z   Z

 ϭ Ϭ

 о Ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

td
td
td
td

 с ϲ ϰ  Ɛ
 с ϭ Ϯ ϴ  Ɛ
 с Ϯ ϱ ϲ  Ɛ
 с ϱ ϭ Ϯ  Ɛ

 с ϭ Ϭ Ϯ ϰ  Ɛ
 с Ϯ Ϭ ϰ ϴ  Ɛ
 с ϰ Ϭ ϵ ϲ  Ɛ
 с ϴ ϭ ϵ Ϯ  Ɛ

 W ƌ Ž Ő ƌ Ă ŵ  ǀ Ă ƌ ŝ Ă ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ

 о ϰ

  Ğ ƌ ƌ Ž ƌ Ɛ  Ě Ž ŵ ŝ Ŷ Ă ƚ Ğ

 Z Ğ ƚ Ğ Ŷ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ  Ğ ƌ ƌ Ž ƌ Ɛ  Ě Ž ŵ ŝ Ŷ Ă ƚ Ğ
 ϭ Ϭ

 о ϱ

 ϭ Ϭ

 о ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 Ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϰ

 Z Ğ ƚ Ğ Ŷ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ  d ŝ ŵ Ğ  ; Ɛ Ğ Đ Ž Ŷ Ě Ɛ Ϳ

Figure 3: Change in RBER over retention time for flash pages
that were programmed using different dwell times.

We make two observations from Figure 3. First, when the
retention time is short (i.e., tr < 10 s), the RBER is similar
across different dwell times. During this time, the RBER is
dominated by program variation errors [11,41,45]. Recall that
a longer dwell time increases the amount of detrapped charge
during self-recovery. However, since the RBER is similar
across different curves regardless of the dwell time, this means
that self-recovery does not mitigate program variation errors.
Therefore, unlike previous works [17, 48, 65], we conclude
that self-recovery does not repair all of the errors that occur
due to wearout in 3D NAND flash memory. Second, when

3 We are unable to show the full threshold voltage distribution for the
ER state, because the ER state threshold voltages are negative, and our
platform cannot measure negative voltage values. This is similar to prior
works [4, 7, 8, 12].
4 Due to space limitations, we refer the reader to prior works [41, 55] for
a detailed methodology on how to obtain the threshold voltage distribution.

5 Based on Arrhenius’ Law [1], the same experiment would take more
than 11 years to finish had we performed it at room temperature (20 ◦C).

5

 W ƌ Ž ď Ă ď ŝ ů ŝ ƚ Ǉ   Ğ Ŷ Ɛ ŝ ƚ Ǉ

 ϭ Ϭ

 W ƌ Ž ď Ă ď ŝ ů ŝ ƚ Ǉ   Ğ Ŷ Ɛ ŝ ƚ Ǉ

the retention time is large (i.e., tr > 10 s), there is a strong
correlation between a longer dwell time and a lower RBER.
During this time, the RBER is dominated by retention errors
(hence the growth in RBER as the retention time increases).
We conclude that a longer dwell time after an erase operation
mitigates retention errors, but not program variation errors,
in 3D NAND flash memory.
Effect on Threshold Voltage. Next, we study the threshold voltage distribution of the flash pages under test, to understand how self-recovery affects the threshold voltage shift
(and thus the RBER) due to retention loss. Figure 4 shows the
threshold voltage distribution before (black dots, tr = 1 min)
and after (red dots, tr = 71 min) a large retention time elapses,
for a flash page programmed using a 64 s dwell time (top
plot), and for a flash page programmed using a 8192 s dwell
time (bottom plot). We observe from the figure that when the
dwell time is higher, the threshold voltage distribution shift
due to retention loss is significantly smaller.

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ; Ă Ϳ   ǁ Ğ ů ů  ƚ ŝ ŵ Ğ  ;

 о ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

td

Vth
 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě 

 W ϯ

 ϱ Ϭ

 W Ϯ

 W ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ ϱ Ϭ

 Ϯ Ϭ Ϭ

 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě  d Ś ƌ Ğ Ɛ Ś Ž ů Ě  s Ž ů ƚ Ă Ő Ğ  ;

Vth

 с ϭ Ϭ Ϯ ϰ  Ɛ
 с ϱ ϭ Ϯ  Ɛ
 с Ϯ ϱ ϲ  Ɛ
 с ϭ Ϯ ϴ  Ɛ
 с ϲ ϰ  Ɛ

 ; Đ Ϳ  W ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

Vth

Vth

 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě 

 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě 

 Ϯ ϱ ϱ

 Ϯ ϱ Ϭ

 Ϯ ϰ ϱ
 Ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 Ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϯ

 Z Ğ ƚ Ğ Ŷ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ  d ŝ ŵ Ğ  ; Ɛ Ğ Đ Ž Ŷ Ě Ɛ Ϳ

Effect on Retention Loss Speed and Program Variation. To quantify how self-recovery changes (1) retention
loss speed and (2) program variation, we construct a simple
model of how the threshold voltage and RBER change due
to these two factors. As we observe in Figure 5, the threshold voltage distribution mean is linearly correlated with the
logarithm of the retention time (tr ). Thus, we fit our measurements to the following linear model, for a given dwell
time:

 о ϱ

 Ϭ

 с Ϯ Ϭ ϰ ϴ  Ɛ

Figure 5: Threshold voltage distribution mean vs. retention
time for different dwell times.

 Ϳ  с  ϴ ϭ ϵ Ϯ  Ɛ Ğ Đ Ž Ŷ Ě Ɛ

 W ϭ

 ϭ ϳ ϱ

 Z Ğ ƚ Ğ Ŷ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ  d ŝ ŵ Ğ  ; Ɛ Ğ Đ Ž Ŷ Ě Ɛ Ϳ

 о ϯ

 о ϰ

 ϭ ϴ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

tr = 71min
tr = 1min

 о Ϯ

 с ϰ Ϭ ϵ ϲ  Ɛ

We also calculate how the width of the distribution changes
due to retention loss for different dwell times (not plotted). We
observe that the change in the distribution width is relatively
small, and thus choose to ignore it to simplify the analysis.

 W Ϯ

 ; ď Ϳ   ǁ Ğ ů ů  ƚ ŝ ŵ Ğ  ;

 о ϭ

 с ϴ ϭ ϵ Ϯ  Ɛ

 Ϯ ϲ Ϭ

 ϭ ϳ Ϭ

 о ϱ

  Z
 ϭ Ϭ

 ; ď Ϳ  W Ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 Ϳ  с  ϲ ϰ  Ɛ Ğ Đ Ž Ŷ Ě Ɛ

 W ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ ϱ

 ϭ ϴ ϱ

 о ϯ

 о ϰ

 ϭ ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ Ϭ

tr = 71min
tr = 1min

 о Ϯ

  Z
 ϭ Ϭ

td

td
td
td
td
td
td
td
td

 ; Ă Ϳ  W ϭ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 ϭ ϭ ϱ

 Ϯ ϱ Ϭ

 ϯ Ϭ Ϭ

Y (tr ) = α · ln(tr ) + β

 Ϳ

(2)

In this model, Y can represent either (1) the mean of the
threshold voltage distribution of each high-voltage state (i.e.,
P1/P2/P3); or (2) the logarithm of the RBER, i.e., log(RBER);7
based on the values chosen for α and β. α represents the
retention loss speed. β represents the program offset, which
is the initial value of Y immediately after programming.
We use the absolute value of the program offset (i.e., |β|) to
quantify the impact of program variation. For the threshold
voltage distribution mean of each high-voltage state, Y and
β are positive, and a more positive program offset results in a
higher initial mean. As we observe under Effect on Threshold
Voltage in Section 3.3, when the mean voltages of neighboring
distributions increase, the overlap between the distributions
decreases, which in turn reduces the number of program
variation errors. For log(RBER), Y and β are negative, because
the RBER is always less than 1. A more negative program
offset (i.e., a greater |β|) corresponds to a more negative initial
value of log(RBER) (i.e., fewer errors).
For each dwell time, we fit Equation 2 to our experimental
characterization data in order to calculate the values of α and

Figure 4: Threshold voltage distribution before and after a
long retention time, for different dwell times.

To quantify the threshold voltage shift as a function of
the dwell time, we plot the statistical means of the threshold
voltage distributions of cells programmed to the P1, P2, and
P3 states in Figure 5. We use the same color gradient that we
used in Figure 3 to represent the different dwell times. Note
that for these experiments, the smallest retention time that we
show on the x-axis (tr = 64 s) is much larger than the smallest
retention time shown in Figure 3 (tr = 0.5 s), because it takes
significantly longer for us to sweep the threshold voltage of
the cells in a wordline (as in Figure 5), compared to simply
measuring the RBER of the wordline (as in Figure 3). We make
two observations from the figure. First, for all three states,
the mean threshold voltage changes by a smaller amount
when the dwell time is higher, corroborating the threshold
voltage distribution shifts shown in Figure 4. Second, for a
fixed dwell time, the change in voltage is linearly related with
the log of retention time.6 We use this relationship to develop
a simple model that can quantify how retention loss speed
changes with dwell time (see below).

7 We model the logarithm of the RBER, because when retention loss
linearly shifts the threshold voltage distribution, which roughly follows a
Gaussian distribution [41], the linear distribution shift results in a logarithmic
change in RBER, which is quantified as the overlapping area between two
neighboring distributions.

6 A similar linear relationship between the change in threshold voltage
and the log of the retention time is observed for planar NAND flash memory
in past works [29, 46].

6

|β| when Y represents (1) the mean voltage of each highervoltage state, or (2) log(RBER). Figure 6 (left) illustrates the
relation between dwell time and retention loss speed (α),
normalized to the greatest observed retention loss speed. Figure 6 (right) illustrates the relation between dwell time and
program offset (|β|), normalized to the greatest observed program offset. Note that the x-axis (i.e., the dwell time) is in log
scale. In both figures, the markers represent our measured
data points from real NAND flash memory chips, and the
dashed lines show a linear trend line for the data.

During the retention test, data is both programmed and read
under the target temperature.
Effect on RBER. First, we study how the RBER changes
with retention time under different temperatures, as shown
in Figure 7 for a wordline with 10,000 P/E cycles. Each curve
represents the RBER under a different programming temperature. We use a color gradient to indicate the temperature:
the reddest color represents the highest temperature (70 ◦C)
and the blackest represents the lowest temperature (0 ◦C).

 Ϳ

 ů Ž Ő ; Z   Z Ϳ

 Ϭ ͘ ϲ

 W ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 Ϭ ͘ ϱ

 W Ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 ϭ ͘ Ϭ Ϭ

 Ϭ ͘ ϵ ϱ

 ϭ Ϭ
 Z   Z

 Ϭ ͘ ϳ

β|

 Ϭ ͘ ϴ

 ů Ž Ő ; Z   Z Ϳ

 ϭ Ϭ

 Ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

  ǁ Ğ ů ů  d ŝ ŵ Ğ  ; Ɛ Ğ Đ Ž Ŷ Ě Ɛ Ϳ

 ϰ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 W ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

° 
° 
 ϱ Ϭ ° 

 Ϭ ͘ ϵ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 W ϭ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 ϭ Ϭ

 Ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϯ

 о Ϯ

° 
° 
 Ϯ Ϭ ° 

° 
° 

 ϳ Ϭ 

 ϯ ϱ 

 ϭ Ϭ 

 ϲ Ϭ 

 Ϯ ϴ 

 Ϭ 

 о ϯ

 о ϰ

 > Ž ǁ Ğ ƌ  ƚ Ğ ŵ Ɖ Ğ ƌ Ă ƚ Ƶ ƌ Ğ
 , ŝ Ő Ś Ğ ƌ  ƚ Ğ ŵ Ɖ Ğ ƌ Ă ƚ Ƶ ƌ Ğ  ď Ğ ƚ ƚ Ğ ƌ

 W Ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 W ϭ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 Ϭ ͘ ϰ

 о ϭ

 ; ď Ϳ

 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě

 Ϭ ͘ ϵ

 W ƌ Ž Ő ƌ Ă ŵ  K Ĩ Ĩ Ɛ Ğ ƚ  ;|

 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě

 Z Ğ ƚ Ğ Ŷ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ  > Ž Ɛ Ɛ  ^ Ɖ Ğ Ğ Ě  ;

α

 Ϳ

 ϭ Ϭ
 ; Ă Ϳ

 ϭ ͘ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ
 ϭ Ϭ

 ϰ

 ď Ğ ƚ ƚ Ğ ƌ

 о ϱ
 о ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 Ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϰ

 Z Ğ ƚ Ğ Ŷ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ  d ŝ ŵ Ğ  ; Ɛ Ğ Đ Ž Ŷ Ě Ɛ Ϳ

  ǁ Ğ ů ů  d ŝ ŵ Ğ  ; Ɛ Ğ Đ Ž Ŷ Ě Ɛ Ϳ

Figure 7: RBER over retention time at 10,000 P/E cycles under
different programming temperatures.

Figure 6: Retention loss speed (left) and program offset
(right), for different dwell times.

3.3. Characterizing the Temperature Effect

We make two key observations from the figure. First, when
the retention time is small (i.e., tr < 2 · 102 ), the RBER is
lower for higher temperatures (i.e., the red curves). Recall
that when the retention time is small, the RBER is dominated
by program variation errors [11, 41, 45]. Thus, we expect that
the RBER decreases with higher temperatures because higher
programming temperatures decrease the number of program
variation errors (we discuss this in more detail under Effect
on Threshold Voltage below). Second, when the retention
time is larger (i.e., tr > 2 · 102 ), the RBER becomes higher
for higher programming temperatures. This is because as
the temperature increases, the retention errors increase at a
faster rate. Due to this faster growth, the RBER for a higher
temperature overtakes the RBER for a lower temperature at
a retention time between 102 –103 s. This indicates that the
threshold voltage shift due to high-temperature retention is
faster than that for low-temperature retention, which is in
line with Arrhenius’ Law [1] (see Section 2.3).

Next, we measure the effect of temperature on self-recovery
and flash reliability (see Section 2.3). Similar to the experiment in Section 3.2, we use eight target wordlines in the same
stack layer from randomly-selected flash blocks. First, for
each block, we wear out the block in 1,000 P/E cycle intervals up to a total of 10,000 P/E cycles, writing pseudorandom
data and using a fixed dwell time of 0.5 s. We then put the
test chip in a temperature-controlled box, and set a target
temperature. After the temperature of the test chip settles
to the target temperature, we perform 20 more P/E cycles
to each target wordline at the target temperature, using a
0.5 s dwell time. Though these P/E cycles are performed at
different temperatures for each test, the dwell time we use is
small, and thus we assume that the difference between the
equivalent dwell times at room temperature are small across
our tests. Then, we perform the retention test described in
Section 3.2 for all target wordlines up to a retention time of
71 min. We repeat the retention test under a range of target
temperatures in each round: 0, 10, 20, 28, 35, 50, 60, and 70 ◦C.

Effect on Threshold Voltage. Next, we study how the
programming temperature affects the threshold voltage of
a flash cell. We begin by studying how the initial threshold
voltage (i.e., the threshold voltage immediately after programming) changes with temperature. We measure the threshold
voltage distribution under different programming temperatures, and then fit our data to Equation 2 to compensate for
any retention loss that occurs during the measurements. Figure 8 shows the resulting threshold voltage distribution for
each state, at 0 ◦C (the black dotted curves) and at 70 ◦C (the
red curves). Note that the ER state distribution at 70 ◦C completely falls below the lowest voltage that we can measure,
and hence is not shown.
We make two observations from Figure 8. First, the higher
programming temperature shifts the P1, P2, and P3 states to
higher threshold voltages, and the ER state to lower threshold
voltages. The threshold voltage shifts are likely due to the
increased electron mobility under high temperature, which
improves the speed of the program operation (and likely the

We make two key observations from Figure 6. First, the
self-recovery effect reduces the retention loss speed linearly
with the logarithm of dwell time. We observe, however, that
the change in retention loss speed is different for each state. As
Figure 6 (left) shows, our data points follow the linear trend
line closely (with an R2 value larger than 90% for each state
and for the RBER). Second, as we concluded from Figure 3,
self-recovery has little effect on program variation within the
tested dwell time range. As Figure 6 (right) shows, the maximum difference in program offset for any of our threshold
voltage states is less than 2.1%. Note that our second finding
is new, and it shows that, unlike previous findings for planar
NAND flash memory [17, 48, 64, 65], self-recovery does not
reduce the number of program variation errors, and hence
the amount of wear, in 3D NAND flash memory.

7

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

programming temperatures. As already shown in Figure 8,
the higher initial threshold voltage at higher programming
temperatures reduces the amount of overlap between neighboring threshold voltage distributions, which in turn reduces
the number of program variation errors. We conclude that
higher temperature increases retention errors but reduces program variation errors.

 о ϭ

 ϳ Ϭ 

 о Ϯ

 Ϭ 

° 

° 

 о ϯ

  Z

 о ϰ

 W ϭ

 W Ϯ

 W ϯ

 о ϱ

 Ϭ

 ϱ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ ϱ Ϭ

 Ϯ Ϭ Ϭ

 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě  d Ś ƌ Ğ Ɛ Ś Ž ů Ě  s Ž ů ƚ Ă Ő Ğ  ;

Vth

 Ϯ ϱ Ϭ

 ϯ Ϭ Ϭ

 Ϳ

3.4. Characterizing the Recovery Cycle Effect

Figure 8: Threshold voltage distribution right after programming at different programming temperatures, predicted by
our retention loss model (Equation 2).

We measure the effect of recovery cycles, i.e., P/E cycles
performed with a long dwell time, on self-recovery and flash
reliability. We measure how the number of recovery cycles
affects retention loss speed. We focus on retention loss speed
in this experiment because, as we saw in Section 3.2, the
dwell time does not affect program variation. We first wear
out each block by repeatedly writing pseudorandom data
with a dwell time of 0.5 s, until the block reaches 3,000 P/E
cycles. Then, we start self-recovery, performing recovery
cycles using a 6-hour dwell time. During the idle time of
each recovery cycle, we perform our 71-minute retention
test at an operating temperature of 70 ◦C to measure the
current retention loss speed. We keep performing recovery
cycles until the change in retention loss speed is less than 1%,
which indicates that an additional recovery cycle does not
significantly increase the effect of self-recovery.

erase operation as well [46, 63]). As a result, each programming pulse adds a greater amount of charge. Second, due
to the threshold voltage distribution shifts, the amount of
overlap between the P1 and P2 distributions, and between the
P2 and P3 distributions, decreases at a higher programming
temperature. This is because while the distribution means
shift to higher voltages at a higher programming temperature, the distribution widths do not change. Because of the
smaller amount of overlap between two neighboring distributions, there are fewer program variation errors at higher
temperatures, as we have shown in Figure 7.
Next, we study how threshold voltage shifts due to retention loss change with the programming temperature. For
brevity, we do not plot these results. We observe that when
the retention time is large (tr > 2 · 102 ), the retention loss
speed increases due to high temperature, which is similar in
nature to the effect of programming temperature on RBER.

Effect on Retention Loss Speed. Based on our characterization data, we calculate the retention loss speed (α) after
each recovery cycle. We use Equation 2 to calculate α, as we
did in Figures 6 and 9. Figure 10 shows how the retention
loss speed changes as a function of the number of recovery
cycles performed. We fit power law trend lines to the data,
shown as a dashed line in the figure.

 ϭ ͘ Ϭ

β|

 Ϳ

 ů Ž Ő ; Z   Z Ϳ

 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě

 W ϭ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 Ϭ ͘ ϵ

 W Ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 Ϭ ͘ ϴ

 W ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 Ϭ ͘ ϳ
 Ϭ ͘ ϲ
 ; Ă Ϳ

 Ϭ ͘ ϱ

 Ϭ

 Ϯ ϱ

 ϱ Ϭ

 ϳ Ϭ

 d Ğ ŵ Ɖ Ğ ƌ Ă ƚ Ƶ ƌ Ğ  ;  Ğ ů Ɛ ŝ Ƶ Ɛ Ϳ

 W ƌ Ž Ő ƌ Ă ŵ  K Ĩ Ĩ Ɛ Ğ ƚ  ;|

 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě

 Z Ğ ƚ Ğ Ŷ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ  > Ž Ɛ Ɛ  ^ Ɖ Ğ Ğ Ě  ;

α

 Ϳ

 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě

α

 Ϳ

Effect on Retention Loss Speed and Program Variation. We use our model from Equation 2 to calculate the retention loss speed and program offset for each programming
temperature, based on our characterization data. Figure 9 illustrates how the programming temperature affects retention
loss speed (left) and program offset (right). We fit a quadratic
trend line for retention loss speed, and a linear trend line for
program offset (shown as dashed lines).
 ϭ ͘ Ϭ
 Ϭ ͘ ϵ

 Z Ğ ƚ Ğ Ŷ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ  > Ž Ɛ Ɛ  ^ Ɖ Ğ Ğ Ě  ;

 W ƌ Ž ď Ă ď ŝ ů ŝ ƚ Ǉ   Ğ Ŷ Ɛ ŝ ƚ Ǉ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ ͘ Ϭ
 Ϭ ͘ ϵ

 ů Ž Ő ; Z   Z Ϳ

 Ϭ ͘ ϴ

 W ϭ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ
 W Ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 Ϭ ͘ ϳ

 W ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 Ϭ ͘ ϲ
 Ϭ ͘ ϱ

 Ϭ
 Ϭ ͘ ϴ

 ϱ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ ϱ

 Ϯ Ϭ

 Z Ğ Đ Ž ǀ Ğ ƌ Ǉ   Ǉ Đ ů Ğ Ɛ

 Ϭ ͘ ϳ

 W ϭ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

Figure 10: Retention loss speed vs. recovery cycles.

 W Ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 Ϭ ͘ ϲ

We make two key observations from Figure 10. First, to
our surprise, the reduction in retention loss speed due to
self-recovery becomes insignificant very quickly. We find
that, for wordlines that have endured 3,000 P/E cycles, most
of the benefits of self-recovery occur within 22 recovery cycles for 3D NAND flash memory. This is much smaller than
the number of cycles required according to prior work [46],
which finds that most of the benefits of self-recovery occur
only when the number of recovery cycles is 10% of the total
P/E cycle count. In other words, according to prior work,
it should have taken at least 300 recovery cycles to achieve
most of the benefits of self-recovery. Importantly, this implies that we can reap the benefits of self-recovery with a
much lower overhead (i.e., significantly fewer recovery cycles) than previously-proposed mechanisms [20, 30, 46]. Thus,

 W ϯ  D Ğ Ă Ŷ

 ; ď Ϳ

 Ϭ ͘ ϱ

 ů Ž Ő ; Z   Z Ϳ

 Ϭ

 Ϯ ϱ

 ϱ Ϭ

 ϳ Ϭ

 d Ğ ŵ Ɖ Ğ ƌ Ă ƚ Ƶ ƌ Ğ  ;  Ğ ů Ɛ ŝ Ƶ Ɛ Ϳ

Figure 9: Retention loss speed (left) and program offset
(right) across different programming temperatures.

We make two observations from Figure 9. First, a higher
temperature accelerates retention loss at a superlinear rate.
We show in Section 4 that this trend complies with Arrhenius’
Law [1]. Second, we find that the programming temperature
affects program variation. This effect has not been accounted
for in prior work, which usually assumes that program operations are performed at room temperature [29]. In Figure 9
(right), we find that the program offset is higher at higher
8

we can improve the overall performance of NAND flash memory devices that perform self-recovery. Second, the RBER
does not change significantly until after the first three recovery cycles. To reduce the latency of self-recovery, prior
works [17, 48, 64, 65] distribute recovery cycles throughout
the flash lifetime, and periodically perform only a single recovery cycle. Based on our observation, performing only one
recovery cycle may not change the RBER significantly, and
these mechanisms may not significantly improve the flash
lifetime as currently designed.

Y0 = A · Tp · PEC + B · Tp + C · PEC + D

In PVM, Y0 is a function of the P/E cycle count of the flash
cell (PEC) and the programming temperature (Tp ), which are
input parameters. A, B, C, and D are model constants that
change based on which value we model (e.g., initial threshold
voltage, initial log of RBER). We fit PVM to our characterization data using the ordinary least squares implemented in
Statsmodels [59], and conclude that the model fits well, with
an R2 value of 91.7%. We provide the values of all the fitted
model parameters online [42].

3.5. Summary of Key Observations

4.2. Effective Retention/Dwell Time Component

We conclude that (1) the self-recovery effect reduces retention loss speed linearly with the logarithm of dwell time,
and has little effect on program variation; (2) the temperature
effect increases retention loss speed at a superlinear rate, and
increases program variation; and (3) the reduction in retention loss speed due to self-recovery becomes insignificant
after 20 recovery cycles.

Next, we build an effective retention/dwell time model
(RDTM) to calculate the acceleration factor (AF in Equation 3),
which scales the retention time or dwell time under any temperature (treal ) to the effective time under room temperature (troom ). Arrhenius’ Law [1] (see Section 2.3) is commonly used by prior works to scale the retention time and
dwell time of flash memory across different temperatures
(e.g., [8, 9, 10, 28, 46]). RDTM uses the same general equation
as Arrhenius’ Law (Equation 1):



1
treal
Ea
1
= exp
–
AF =
·
(5)
troom
kB
Treal Troom

4. Self-Recovery Effect Modeling
We use our observations from Section 3 to construct Unified
Recovery and Temperature (URT), a comprehensive analytical
model of the impact of retention, wearout, self-recovery, and
temperature on two output parameters: (1) the threshold
voltage of a flash cell, and (2) the raw bit error rate (RBER) of
a flash page. URT calculates each output parameter Y as:
Y = Y0 + ∆Y (tr · AF, td · AF, PEC)

(4)

In RDTM, AF is a function of the room temperature (Troom ),
the current temperature of the NAND flash memory (Treal ),
and the activation energy (Ea ). kB is the Boltzmann constant.
To accurately model the amplification factor, we (1) experimentally calculate a new value of Ea that we can use for 3D
NAND flash memory; and (2) verify the accuracy of Arrhenius’ Law through experimental characterization, which no
previous work has done for 3D NAND flash memory.
While Ea is commonly accepted to be 1.1 eV for planar
NAND flash memory [8, 28], we cannot use the same value of
Ea for 3D NAND flash memory, due to changes in materials
and manufacturing process. Fortunately, we have extensive
real device characterization data on retention loss at different
temperatures (Section 3.3), which enables us to determine the
correct Ea for 3D NAND flash memory. We define t1 as the
time required for a 3D NAND flash memory device to experience a fixed amount of retention loss, ∆Y , at temperature
T1 . We define t2 as the time required for the same amount of
retention loss to occur at temperature T2 . Using Equation 1,
the activation energy (Ea ) can be calculated as:
 
kB · ln tt12 · T1 T2
Ea =
(6)
T2 – T1

(3)

In the equation, Y0 is the initial value of the output parameter
immediately after a cell is programmed, and ∆Y is the change
in the output parameter due to retention loss. ∆Y is a function
of the (1) retention time (tr ) and (2) the dwell time (td ), both
of which are scaled by an acceleration factor AF (see below),
and (3) the P/E cycle count (PEC).
URT consists of three components. The program variation component (PVM; Section 4.1) predicts Y0 based on the
amount of program variation that took place. The effective
retention/dwell time component (RDTM; Section 4.2) computes
AF, which scales the retention or dwell time at the current
temperature of the NAND flash memory to the effective time
at room temperature that has the same impact on Y . The
self-recovery and retention component (SRRM; Section 4.3),
predicts ∆Y based on the effective retention/dwell time and
the P/E cycle count. We show how URT can be used to improve flash reliability in Section 5.

4.1. Program Variation Component
First, we build a program variation model (PVM) to predict
the initial values (Y0 in Equation 3) of the threshold voltage
and RBER immediately after a cell is programmed. The initial values are determined by (1) the target programming
voltage, which is fixed for each state, and (2) the program
offset (Section 3). Recall that program offset is affected by the
programming temperature (Section 3.3). Prior work shows
that the P/E cycle count significantly affects program offset
as well [12, 13, 41, 45].
To account for both variables (i.e., programming temperature and P/E cycle count), we use a multivariate linear regression model to model program variation:

We define t1 as the time required for 3D NAND flash memory
to experience a fixed amount of retention loss, ∆Y , at temperature T1 . We define t2 as the time required for the same
amount of retention loss to occur at temperature T2 .
We choose T2 = 343.15 K (70 ◦C) as the reference temperature, and t2 = 3600 s as the reference retention time, as our
model is more resilient to noise at a larger retention time.
Using our characterization data from Section 3.3, we find the
equivalent t1 for different temperature values of T1 , spanning
20–70 ◦C, and for different P/E cycle counts, spanning 1,000–
9

Figure 11 illustrates how predictions from SRRM compare with our measured characterization data. Figure 11a
compares the SRRM predictions and measured values of the
threshold voltage shift for cells in state P1, P2, or P3. Figure 11b compares the SRRM predictions and measured values
of the change in the log of RBER. Each cross (‘x’) in the figure
represents a data point, where the x-coordinate of each data
point is the value predicted by SRRM, and the y-coordinate of
each data point is the value measured during our characterization. The dashed line shows the perfect fit (i.e., where the
predicted and measured values are equal). We observe that
for both the threshold voltage shift and the change in RBER,
all of the data points are very close to the perfect fit line. Thus,
SRRM accurately predicts both output parameters. Overall,
the percentage root mean square error (%RMSE) for SRRM is
4.9%. As a comparison, if we were to predict these two output
parameters using UDM [46], a previously-proposed model
for retention loss in planar NAND flash memory, the average
%RMSE of the predictions would be 17.8%, which is much less
accurate than the predictions from our model. We conclude
that SRRM is highly accurate for predicting the change in
RBER and the threshold voltage shift at room temperature in
3D NAND flash memory.

4.3. Self-Recovery and Retention Component
We build a self-recovery and retention model (SRRM) to accurately predict the threshold voltage shift and change in RBER
(∆Y in Equation 3) due to retention loss. SRRM predicts the
effect of (1) effective retention time, (2) effective dwell time,
and (3) P/E cycle count, which all directly affect retention
loss speed (see Section 3.2).
To construct SRRM, we repeat our dwell time experiments
from Section 3.2 at room temperature. We cover a slightly
larger dwell time range than our previous experiments, testing from 32 s to 4.6 h. To include the effect of the P/E cycle
count, we perform the retention test described in Section 3.2
for up to a 24-day retention time under room temperature,
using eight randomly-selected flash blocks, and spanning a
range between 1,000 and 10,000 P/E cycles at 1,000-P/E-cycle
intervals. We observe similar trends in terms of retention
time, dwell time, and temperature sensitivity as the findings
we observe at a higher temperature in Section 3. For brevity,
we do not plot these results, but we provide them online [42].
From an analysis of the results of these experiments, we
find that the threshold voltage shift in 3D NAND flash memory is much less sensitive to the P/E cycle count than planar
NAND flash memory. Thus, we develop a new model that predicts the impact of retention and self-recovery on 3D NAND
flash memory, instead of relying on prior models for planar
NAND flash memory. Our SRRM model is as follows:


ter
∆Y (ter , ted , PEC) = b · (PEC + c) · ln 1 +
(7)
t0 + a · ted

|ΔlogΔRBER)|

10,000 P/E cycles. We use ordinary least squares estimates
to fit Equation 6 to these data points. From the fit, we determine that for the best fit, Ea = 1.04 eV for the 3D NAND flash
memory chips that we test. The 95% confidence interval for
Ea is 1.01–1.08 eV. The value of Ea is based on the materials
used for the cell, and should be similar for 3D charge trap
cells manufactured by other vendors [18, 31, 47].
Next, we verify that Arrhenius’ Law holds for 3D NAND
flash memory, by calculating the coefficient of determination
(R2 ) of the fit to the equation for Arrhenius’ Law. We find
that R2 = 0.76. This means that Arrhenius’ Law explains 76%
of the variations due to temperature. This is a good fit given
that we use a single value for Ea (best fit) across all of our data
points, because it is known that activation energy changes
across different temperatures and P/E cycle counts [2, 43].
We use a single value of Ea regardless of temperature and
P/E cycle count to simplify RDTM. We leave more accurate
activation energy modeling for future work.

 ; Ă Ϳ

 Ϯ ϱ
 Ϯ Ϭ
 ϭ ϱ

 D Ğ Ă Ɛ Ƶ ƌ Ğ Ě 

 D Ğ Ă Ɛ Ƶ ƌ Ğ Ě 

|ΔV|

 ϯ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ
 ϱ
 Ϭ
 Ϭ

 ϱ

 ϭ Ϭ

 W ƌ Ğ Ě ŝ Đ ƚ Ğ Ě 

 ϭ ϱ

 Ϯ Ϭ

|ΔV|

 Ϯ ϱ

 ϯ Ϭ

  ď Ǉ  ^ Z Z D

 ϲ
 ; ď Ϳ

 ϱ
 ϰ
 ϯ
 Ϯ
 ϭ
 Ϭ
 Ϭ

 ϭ

 W ƌ Ğ Ě ŝ Đ ƚ Ğ Ě 

 Ϯ

 ϯ

 ϰ

 ϱ

|ΔlogΔRBER)|

 ϲ

  ď Ǉ  ^ Z Z D

Figure 11: SRRM prediction accuracy.

5. Improving 3D NAND Reliability
Our goal in this section is to improve flash reliability and
lifetime by developing a new mechanism that makes use of
our findings (Section 3) and our new model (Section 4). Our
new mechanism is called HeatWatch.

5.1. Observations
We make three key observations from the following three
experiments that lead to the design of HeatWatch. First, we
observe that SSD write intensity and the SSD environmental
temperature significantly impact flash lifetime. The write intensity of an SSD is measured as the number of full drive
writes per day. Given a fixed SSD size, the write intensity
is inversely proportional to the average dwell time, thus affecting flash lifetime (Section 3.2). This is because modern
SSDs use wear-leveling techniques to keep all flash blocks in
the SSD at a similar P/E cycle count [4, 5, 15, 25]. The environmental temperature affects the flash lifetime (Section 3.3),
because it changes the temperature of the underlying NAND
flash memory.
Figure 12 shows the flash lifetime under different write
intensities and environmental temperatures, assuming that
the vendor guarantees a three-month retention time for the
data, which is typical for enterprise SSDs [4, 5, 8, 9, 51]. The

In SRRM, ∆Y is a function of three input parameters: (1) the
effective retention time of the data stored in the cell (ter ),
(2) the effective dwell time (ted ), and (3) the P/E cycle count
for a flash cell (PEC). The model has four constants, whose
values change depending on which output parameter (∆Y )
we are evaluating: b and c control the impact of P/E cycle
count on retention loss speed, and t0 and a control the impact
of dwell time on retention loss speed. To determine the values for these constants, we use the non-linear least squares
algorithm implemented in SciPy [32, 39] to fit SRRM to the
characterization data we collected.
10

 ϰ Ϭ 
 ϱ Ϭ 

° 
° 

 ϲ Ϭ 
 ϳ Ϭ 

° 
° 

 Ϯ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ
 ϭ ϱ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ
 ϭ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ
 ϱ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ
 , ŝ Ő Ś Ğ ƌ  ƚ Ğ ŵ Ɖ Ğ ƌ Ă ƚ Ƶ ƌ Ğ  ď Ğ ƚ ƚ Ğ ƌ

 Ϭ
 ϭ Ϭ

 о ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 Ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϰ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϱ

 & Ƶ ů ů   ƌ ŝ ǀ Ğ  t ƌ ŝ ƚ Ğ Ɛ  W Ğ ƌ   Ă Ǉ

Figure 12: Change in flash lifetime due to write intensity and
environmental temperature (tr = 3 months).

 ; Ă Ϳ  K Ɖ ƚ ŝ ŵ Ă ů 

From the figure, we see that the flash lifetime initially decreases as SSD write intensity increases, but stops decreasing
at around 5,000 P/E cycles. When the write intensity is low
(< 104 drive writes/day, which covers the range of write intensities of most contemporary workloads [9]), a higher temperature is desirable, as it improves both the effective dwell
time and program variation and thus leads to a longer lifetime.
In contrast, when the write intensity is high, a lower temperature is better due to an improved effective retention time.
Note that these curves drastically shift (not shown) (1) with
different assumptions about retention time, or (2) when the
temperature is not constant. Thus, we find that no single
temperature or temperature range is ideal.

 Z   Z

 ϭ Ϭ
 ϭ Ϭ
 ϭ Ϭ
 ϭ Ϭ

 Ϯ Ϭ

Vopt
Vopt

 D Ğ Ă Ɛ Ƶ ƌ Ğ Ě 

 ϭ ϯ ϳ

 W ƌ Ğ Ě ŝ Đ ƚ Ğ Ě 

 Ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϯ

 Ϯ ϭ ϲ
 Ϯ ϭ ϰ
 Ϯ ϭ Ϯ
 Ϯ ϭ Ϭ

Vopt
Vopt

 D Ğ Ă Ɛ Ƶ ƌ Ğ Ě 

 Ϯ Ϭ ϴ

 W ƌ Ğ Ě ŝ Đ ƚ Ğ Ě 

 Ϯ Ϭ ϲ
 ϭ Ϭ

 Ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϯ

 Z Ğ ƚ Ğ Ŷ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ  d ŝ ŵ Ğ  ; Ɛ Ğ Đ Ž Ŷ Ě Ɛ Ϳ

5.2. HeatWatch Mechanism
Motivated by our observations in Section 5.1, we propose
HeatWatch, a mechanism that improves flash reliability and
lifetime by predicting and applying the optimal read reference
voltage using our URT model from Section 4. HeatWatch
consists of (1) three tracking components, which monitor and
efficiently record the SSD temperature, dwell time, retention
time, and P/E cycle count; and (2) two prediction components,
which compute the URT model using this tracked information
to accurately predict the optimal read reference voltage for
each read operation.
Tracking Component 1: SSD Temperature. Modern
SSDs already contain multiple temperature sensors to prevent
overheating [38, 44]. HeatWatch efficiently logs the readings
from these sensors, which the RDTM component of URT (see
Section 4.2) uses to scale the dwell time and retention time.
HeatWatch records the temperature every second, and precomputes the acceleration factors (AFi ) for every logarithmic
time interval i. HeatWatch uses logarithmic intervals because
the effects of dwell time and retention time are logarithmic
with respect to their duration (see Section 3.2). HeatWatch
uses RDTM to calculate AF0 . For all other intervals, AFi is
calculated as a piecewise integral, by summing up the two
most recent values of AFi–1 , since interval i covers double the
amount of time as interval i – 1. Therefore, for each interval,
HeatWatch stores the current and previous values of AFi , in
an acceleration factor log.

 о ϱ

Vref − Vopt|

Vc

Figure 14: Measured and URT-predicted Vopt .

 о ϰ

 ϭ ϱ

 ϭ ϯ ϵ

 ϭ Ϭ

 о ϯ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ ϰ ϭ

 Z Ğ ƚ Ğ Ŷ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ  d ŝ ŵ Ğ  ; Ɛ Ğ Đ Ž Ŷ Ě Ɛ Ϳ

 о Ϯ

 ϱ

 ϭ ϰ ϯ

 ϭ ϯ ϱ

 о ϭ

 Ϭ

 ; ď Ϳ  K Ɖ ƚ ŝ ŵ Ă ů 

 Ϯ Ϯ Ϭ
 Ϯ ϭ ϴ

 ϭ ϰ ϱ

Second, we observe that the choice of the read reference
voltage (Vref ) significantly affects RBER and flash lifetime. The
voltage at which the lowest RBER can be achieved is called
the optimal read reference voltage (Vopt ). Vopt changes based
on conditions such as retention time and P/E cycle count.
Adapting the optimal read reference voltage to these changing
conditions significantly increases flash lifetime [4, 5, 8, 12, 13,
41, 55]. Based on our experiments under room temperature,
Figure 13 shows how the RBER increases as the applied read
reference voltage becomes further away from the optimal
read reference voltage (which we refer to as the |Vref – Vopt |
distance). We find that the RBER increases exponentially as
the |Vref – Vopt | distance increases. We conclude, as prior
works have [4, 5, 8, 13, 41], that it is important to accurately
predict the optimal read reference voltage, as even a small
|Vref – Vopt | distance can greatly increase the error rate (and
thus hurt the flash lifetime).
 ϭ Ϭ

Vb

 ϭ ϰ ϳ

Vth

° 
° 

 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě 

 ϯ Ϭ 

Vth

 Ϯ Ϭ 

 > Ž ǁ Ğ ƌ

 W ͬ    Ǉ Đ ů Ğ Ɛ

° 
° 

 ϭ Ϭ 

 E Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ů ŝ ǌ Ğ Ě 

 Ϭ 

 Ϯ ϱ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ

neighboring threshold voltage distributions. Figure 14 shows
the measured Vopt from our characterization (blue dots in the
figure), and the value of Vopt calculated by using our URT
model to predict the threshold voltage distributions of each
state (orange curve), for read reference voltages Vb and Vc
(see Section 2.1). The x-axis shows the retention time of the
data in log scale. We see that after 4000 s of retention time,
the measured optimal read reference voltages for Vb and Vc
change by 8 and 11 voltage steps, respectively.8 Comparing
the blue dots with the orange curves, we find that our URTbased Vopt prediction is always within 1 voltage step of the
empirical optimal read reference voltage. We conclude that
URT accurately predicts the optimal read reference voltage.

 ď Ğ ƚ ƚ Ğ ƌ

 ϯ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ

 ƚ Ğ ŵ Ɖ Ğ ƌ Ă ƚ Ƶ ƌ Ğ

SSD write intensity is shown on the x-axis in log scale. We
plot the results by using separate curves for each temperature
that we evaluate, which ranges from 0 ◦C to 70 ◦C.

 Ϯ ϱ

Figure 13: RBER vs. |Vref – Vopt | distance.

Tracking Component 2: Dwell Time. The selfrecovery effect is dependent on the average dwell time across
multiple P/E cycles (Section 5.1). The average dwell time is

Third, we observe that the optimal read reference voltage
in 3D NAND flash memory changes over time, and can be
accurately predicted as the value that falls in the middle of two

8 Our characterization shows that V does not change significantly based
a
on retention time, so we do not plot it. We find that URT accurately predicts
the lack of change in Va .

 s Ž ů ƚ Ă Ő Ğ  ^ ƚ Ğ Ɖ Ɛ   Ğ ƚ ǁ Ğ Ğ Ŷ |

11

determined by the workload write intensity. Thus, we use
the SSD controller to (1) monitor the workload write intensity online, and (2) calculate the average dwell time for each
flash block. HeatWatch does not need to track the variation
in dwell time across different flash pages within the same
block, as we find from our experimental characterization that
the effect of page-to-page dwell time variation is negligible
(Section 5.1).
HeatWatch approximates the effective dwell time by taking the average unscaled dwell time across the last 20 P/E
cycles, and scaling it using RDTM. The SSD controller keeps
a counter that tracks the amount of data written to the SSD,
and logs the timestamps of the last 20 full drive writes. When
a flash block is programmed during drive write n, the SSD
controller calculates the average unscaled dwell time as the
difference between the current time and the timestamp of
drive write n – 20. Then, the SSD controller computes and
stores the effective room temperature dwell time by scaling
it using the aforementioned acceleration factor log.

ing is dominated by the latency to predict the optimal read
reference voltage for each wordline. In the worst case, ROR
performs 300 read operations per wordline, using a different
voltage step for each read. For the 10 wordlines sampled by
URT model tuning, assuming a read latency of 100 µs, the
total worst-case latency of URT model tuning is 0.3 s. Note
that this tuning procedure needs to be performed only infrequently (e.g., every 1,000 P/E cycles), and can be performed
in the background (i.e., when the chip is idle), thus incurring
negligible performance overhead.
Storage Overhead. HeatWatch needs to store three sets
of information. (1) HeatWatch stores the acceleration factor
for only logarithmic time intervals from 0.5 s to 1 year (26
intervals in total). HeatWatch stores the current and previous
value of each acceleration factor, as described in Tracking SSD
Temperature above. Assuming that each acceleration factor
is stored as a 4 B floating-point number, the total log requires
208 B of storage. (2) HeatWatch stores the programming temperature, dwell time, and program time for each flash block.
Assuming that each piece of information uses 4 B, for a 1 TB
SSD with an 8 MB flash block size, HeatWatch uses 1.5 MB
of storage in total to store this information. (3) HeatWatch
needs a 32-bit counter, and must store the timestamps for the
last 20 full disk writes (Section 3.4), which requires 84 B of
storage. In total, the three sets of information require less
than 1.6 MB of storage. To minimize the performance overhead of accessing this data, HeatWatch buffers the data in
the on-board DRAM in the SSD controller [4, 5]. The storage
overhead is very small, as a 1 TB SSD typically contains 1 GB
of DRAM for caching [4, 5].

Tracking Component 3: P/E Cycles and Retention
Time. The SSD controller already records the P/E cycle count
of each block to use in wear-leveling algorithms [4, 5, 15, 25].
To track the retention time of each flash block, HeatWatch
simply logs the timestamp when the block is selected for
programming. Then, HeatWatch calculates the effective retention time for each read operation as the difference between
the program time and read time, scaled by RDTM.
Prediction Component 1: Optimizing the Read Reference Voltage. The optimal read reference voltage between
two states can be predicted accurately by averaging the means
of the threshold voltage distributions for each state (Section 5.1). As HeatWatch knows the P/E cycle count, programming temperature, effective dwell time, and effective
retention time, it can use the URT model from Section 4 to
predict the means of the threshold voltage distributions for
each state, and thus the optimal read reference voltage. For
each read operation, the SSD controller simply gathers all
the metadata for the flash block that is to be read, and then
predicts and applies the optimal read reference voltage. The
information gathering and prediction happen after the FTL
translates the logical address of the read to a physical address
(see [4, 5] for detail), since the information for the flash block
is indexed using the physical address.

Latency Overhead. HeatWatch performs two operations
that contribute to its latency. (1) Every second, HeatWatch
updates the acceleration factor log with the latest temperature
reading. This update can be done in the background, and,
thus, its performance overhead is negligible. (2) HeatWatch
computes the URT model during each read operation, which
involves performing only 16 arithmetic computations in the
SSD controller (Section 4). The model computation latency is
negligible compared to the flash read latency (>25 µs [27]).

5.3. Evaluation
To evaluate HeatWatch, we examine the raw bit error rate
(RBER) and lifetime of four different configurations:
• Fixed Vref , which always uses the default read reference
voltage to read the data.
• Retention-Only, which predicts the optimal read reference
voltage based on a model that considers only P/E cycle
count and retention time [8, 12, 13, 41, 53, 55]. Note that
this model always assumes a fixed retention loss speed,
regardless of the dwell time and temperature.
• HeatWatch, our proposed mechanism to accurately predict
the optimal read reference voltage by tracking dwell time
and temperature and using our URT model.
• Oracle, which always ideally uses the measured optimal
read reference voltage, and does not incur any performance
overhead. Note that this is not implementable.
We evaluate these four configurations using 28 commonlyused real storage traces [49], which have varying write intensities. Each trace represents seven days of workload data, and

Prediction Component 2: Fine-Tuning URT Model
Parameters Online. To accommodate for chip-to-chip variation, URT learns its model parameters online. We initialize
the URT model parameters using a set of parameters that
have been learned offline, which the vendor can provide at
manufacture time. Over time, URT fine-tunes its model parameters by (1) sampling a number of flash wordlines in
the chip (10 in our evaluations), which are selected at random from blocks that span a range of different P/E cycles,
effective dwell/retention time, and programming temperatures; (2) learning the optimal read reference voltages for the
sampled flash wordlines online, using a technique similar to
Retention Optimized Reading (ROR) [8]; and (3) using the
sampled data to fit the fine-tuned URT model parameters for
each chip, which can be done relatively easily in the firmware
with little overhead [41]. The overall latency for online train12

contains timestamps we can use to calculate the dwell time
and retention time of each access. We simulate temperature
variation over the course of a day as the superposition of a
sinusoidal function and some Gaussian noise. The sinusoidal
model has a mean of 35 ◦C, an amplitude of 15 ◦C, and a 1-day
period, representing how the temperature changes during
a daily cycle. The Gaussian noise model that we use has a
standard deviation of 3 ◦C.
Figure 15 shows how the RBER increases with P/E cycle
count for our four evaluated configurations, using a workload
that appends all 28 disk traces together to mimic an SSD
that runs multiple workloads back-to-back. The dotted line
shows an error correction capability (see Section 2.2) of 2 ·
10–3 errors per bit [4, 5]. We determine the lifetime for each
configuration using the point at which the RBER intersects
the error correction capability. We use Fixed Vref , which has
the highest RBER, as our baseline. From the figure, we see that
Retention-Only reduces the RBER by 83.1%, on average across
all P/E cycles, compared to the baseline, HeatWatch reduces
the RBER by 93.5% compared to the baseline. This is very
close to the average RBER improvement under Oracle (93.9%).
HeatWatch significantly improves lifetime due to its RBER
improvement. The lifetime with HeatWatch is 21,065 P/E
cycles, which is 3.19× and 1.29× the lifetime with Fixed Vref
and Retention-Only, respectively. HeatWatch comes within
only 200 P/E cycles of the Oracle lifetime.
 ϭ Ϭ

 о ϭ

 & ŝ ǆ Ğ Ě 

memory devices over a state-of-the-art mechanism [53], and
approaches the lifetime of an ideal mechanism that has perfect knowledge of the optimal read reference voltage.

6. Related Work
To our knowledge, this paper is the first to (1) experimentally characterize and accurately model the self-recovery and
temperature effects in 3D NAND flash memory; and (2) devise a mechanism that improves 3D NAND flash memory
lifetime by comprehensively taking into account retention
time, wearout, self-recovery, and temperature. We discuss
the closely-related works.
Data Retention in NAND Flash Memory. Many prior
works focus on flash memory retention loss and retention errors, and show that retention loss is the most dominant source
of errors in modern NAND flash memory [4,5,8,9,19,45,51,53].
These works do not consider the effects of self-recovery and
temperature on retention loss. Our work investigates these effects through an extensive characterization of state-of-the-art
3D NAND flash memory chips.
3D NAND Flash Memory Characterization. Recent
works study the error characteristics of 3D NAND flash memory, and identify differences between 3D and planar NAND
flash memory due to memory cell design and architectural
changes [4,5,18,47,54]. None of these works provide a detailed
characterization of the impact of self-recovery, retention, P/E
cycle count, and temperature on real 3D NAND flash memory.

Vref

 Z   Z

 Z Ğ ƚ Ğ Ŷ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ Ͳ K Ŷ ů Ǉ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ

 , Ğ Ă ƚ t Ă ƚ Đ Ś

 о Ϯ

Retention Loss Models. Our URT model is inspired by
and improves upon the Unified Detrapping Metric (UDM)
model [46]. There are three reasons why prior models developed for planar NAND flash memory, such as UDM, are
insufficient for 3D NAND flash memory. First, 3D charge
trap cells are more resilient to P/E cycling than the floatinggate cells used by planar NAND flash memory [18, 47, 54].
Thus, the PEC component in our model (Equation 7) is different from the equivalent component in UDM. Second, 3D
NAND flash memory has a different activation energy than
planar NAND flash memory, as we experimentally show in
Section 4.2. Third, 3D NAND flash memory reliability is
affected by the programming temperature, as we show in
Section 4.1. Because UDM does not accurately capture these
changes, its error rate for 3D NAND flash memory is 3.6×
greater than the error rate for the SRRM component of our
new URT model, as we show in Section 4.3.

 K ƌ Ă Đ ů Ğ

 о ϯ

     > ŝ ŵ ŝ ƚ

 о ϰ

 Ϭ

 ϱ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ

 ϭ ϱ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ

 Ϯ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ

 Ϯ ϱ Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ

 W ͬ    Ǉ Đ ů Ğ Ɛ

Figure 15: RBER vs. P/E cycle count.

Lifetime (P/E cycles)

We repeat the same experiment for each workload individually, and determine the lifetime for each workload under
the four configurations, as shown in Figure 16. On average
across all of our workloads, The lifetime under Retention-Only
is 3.11× the lifetime of the Fixed Vref baseline. HeatWatch
improves the lifetime further, with a lifetime that is 3.85×
the baseline lifetime. Again, this is very close to the lifetime
improvement of Oracle (3.89×).
30K
25K
20K
15K
10K
5K
K

Fixed Vref

Retention-Only

HeatWatch

Improving Flash Reliability. Many prior works propose
mechanisms to improve flash lifetime and reduce raw bit errors (see [4,5] for a detailed survey). For example, flash refresh
techniques limit the number of retention errors to achieve
higher P/E cycle lifetime [9, 10, 40, 51]. Prior work also adjusts the read reference voltage according to P/E cycle count
and retention time to reduce the RBER [8, 12, 13, 41, 53, 55].
Different from prior work, we develop a new mechanism that
tracks workload write intensity and SSD temperature online
and adjusts read reference voltage accordingly to improve
flash lifetime. We compare our mechanism to prior mechanisms that are agnostic to these factors and show that it can
significantly reduce RBER and improve flash lifetime.

Oracle
3.85x

Figure 16: P/E cycle lifetime for each workload.

We conclude that by incorporating dwell time and temperature information to predict the optimal read reference
voltage, HeatWatch improves the lifetime of 3D NAND flash
13

7. Conclusion

[24] A. Fukami et al., “Improving the Reliability of Chip-Off Forensic Analysis of
NAND Flash Memory Devices,” Digital Investigation, Mar. 2017.
[25] E. Gal and S. Toledo, “Algorithms and Data Structures for Flash Memories,” CSUR,
Jun. 2005.
[26] A. Grossi et al., “Reliability of 3D NAND Flash Memories,” in 3D Flash Memories.
Springer, 2016.
[27] L. M. Grupp et al., “The Bleak Future of NAND Flash Memory,” in FAST, 2012.
[28] JEDEC Solid State Technology Assn., Method for Developing Acceleration Models
for Electronic Component Failure Mechanisms, Publication JESD91A, 2003.
[29] JEDEC Solid State Technology Assn., Solid-State Drive (SSD) Requirements and
Endurance Test Method, Publication JESD218, 2010.
[30] JEDEC Solid State Technology Assn., Electrically Erasable Programmable ROM
(EEPROM) Program/Erase Endurance and Data Retention Stress Test, Publication
JESD22-A117C, 2011.
[31] W. Jeong et al., “A 128 Gb 3b/Cell V-NAND Flash Memory with 1 Gb/s I/O Rate,”
JSSC, Jan. 2016.
[32] E. Jones et al., “SciPy: Open Source Scientific Tools for Python,” http://www.scipy.
org/.
[33] D. Kahng and S. M. Sze, “A Floating Gate and Its Application to Memory Devices,”
Bell Syst. Tech. J., Aug. 1967.
[34] D. Kang et al., “7.1 256Gb 3b/Cell V-NAND Flash Memory with 48 Stacked WL
Layers,” in ISSCC, 2016.
[35] R. Katsumata et al., “Pipe-Shaped BiCS Flash Memory with 16 Stacked Layers
and Multi-Level-Cell Operation for Ultra High Density Storage Devices,” in VLSIT,
2009.
[36] C. Kim et al., “A 512Gb 3b/Cell 64-Stacked WL 3D V-NAND Flash Memory,” in
ISSCC, 2017.
[37] S. Lee et al., “Lifetime Management of Flash-Based SSDs Using Recovery-Aware
Dynamic Throttling,” in FAST, 2012.
[38] T. Lenny, “The Maturity of NVM ExpressTM ,” in Flash Memory Summit, 2014.
[39] K. Levenberg, “A Method for the Solution of Certain Non-Linear Problems in
Least Squares,” Quarterly of Applied Mathematics, 1944.
[40] Y. Luo et al., “WARM: Improving NAND Flash Memory Lifetime With WriteHotness Aware Retention Management,” in MSST, 2015.
[41] Y. Luo et al., “Enabling Accurate and Practical Online Flash Channel Modeling for
Modern MLC NAND Flash Memory,” JSAC, 2016.
[42] Y. Luo et al., “Exploiting Self-Recovery and Temperature Awareness to Improve
3D NAND Flash Memory Reliability,” Carnegie Mellon Univ., SAFARI Research
Group, Tech. Rep. 2018-001, 2018.
[43] T. Marquart, “Practical Approach to Determining SSD Reliability,” in Flash Memory Summit, 2015.
[44] J. Meza et al., “A Large-Scale Study of Flash Memory Failures in the Field,” in
SIGMETRICS, 2015.
[45] N. Mielke et al., “Bit Error Rate in NAND Flash Memories,” in IRPS, 2008.
[46] N. Mielke et al., “Recovery Effects in the Distributed Cycling of Flash Memories,”
in IRPS, 2006.
[47] K. Mizoguchi et al., “Data-Retention Characteristics Comparison of 2D and 3D
TLC NAND Flash Memories,” in IMW, 2017.
[48] V. Mohan et al., “How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Flash Endurance,”
HotStorage, 2010.
[49] D. Narayanan et al., “Write Off-Loading: Practical Power Management for Enterprise Storage,” TOS, Nov. 2008.
[50] I. Narayanan et al., “SSD Failures in Datacenters: What? When? And Why?” in
SYSTOR, 2016.
[51] Y. Pan et al., “Quasi-Nonvolatile SSD: Trading Flash Memory Nonvolatility to Improve Storage System Performance for Enterprise Applications,” in HPCA, 2012.
[52] N. Papandreou et al., “Effect of Read Disturb on Incomplete Blocks in MLC NAND
Flash Arrays,” in IMW, 2016.
[53] N. Papandreou et al., “Using Adaptive Read Voltage Thresholds to Enhance the
Reliability of MLC NAND Flash Memory Systems,” in GLSVLSI, 2014.
[54] K. Park et al., “Three-Dimensional 128 Gb MLC Vertical NAND Flash Memory
with 24-WL Stacked Layers and 50 MB/s High-Speed Programming,” JSSC, Jan.
2015.
[55] T. Parnell et al., “Modelling of the Threshold Voltage Distributions of Sub-20nm
NAND Flash Memory,” in GLOBECOM, 2014.
[56] SAFARI Research Group, “3D NAND Flash Memory Characterization Data,” https:
//github.com/CMU-SAFARI/HeatWatch.
[57] Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., “Samsung V-NAND Technology,” white Paper:
http://tinyurl.com/mprrdxs. 2014.
[58] B. Schroeder et al., “Flash Reliability in Production: The Expected and the Unexpected,” in FAST, 2016.
[59] S. Seabold and J. Perktold, “Statsmodels: Econometric and Statistical Modeling
with Python,” in SciPy, 2010.
[60] Serial ATA International Organization, Serial ATA Revision 3.3 Specification, 2016.
[61] Toshiba Corp., “3D Flash Memory: Scalable, High Density Storage for Large
Capacity Applications,” http://www.toshiba.com/taec/adinfo/technologymoves/
3d-flash.jsp, 2017.
[62] H. A. Wegener et al., “The Variable Threshold Transistor, A New ElectricallyAlterable, Non-Destructive Read-Only Storage Device,” in IEDM, 1967.
[63] E. H. Wilson et al., “ZombieNAND: Resurrecting Dead NAND Flash for Improved
SSD Longevity,” in MASCOTS, 2014.
[64] Q. Wu et al., “A First Study on Self-Healing Solid-State Drives,” in IMW, 2011.
[65] Q. Wu et al., “Exploiting Heat-Accelerated Flash Memory Wear-Out Recovery to
Enable Self-Healing SSDs,” in HotStorage, 2011.
[66] J. H. Yoon, “3D NAND Technology: Implications to Enterprise Storage Applications,” in Flash Memory Summit, 2015.
[67] J. Yoon, “Flash Quality Management in Enterprise Storage Applications,” in Flash
Memory Summit, 2014.

We perform the first detailed experimental characterization of the impact of self-recovery and temperature on the
reliability of 3D NAND flash memory. We find that due to
significant changes in the memory design and manufacturing
process, prior findings and models for planar NAND flash
memory are not accurate for 3D NAND flash memory. We
use key findings from our characterization to develop URT,
a unified and accurate cell threshold voltage and raw bit error rate model that takes into account the combined effects
of self-recovery, temperature, retention loss, and wearout.
We develop a new mechanism, HeatWatch, that uses URT
to dynamically adapt the read reference voltage to the data
retention time, dwell time, SSD temperature, and wearout.
We show that HeatWatch greatly reduces the raw bit error
rate and improves flash lifetime. We conclude that the effects
of self-recovery and temperature in 3D NAND flash memory
can be accurately modeled and successfully used to improve
flash reliability. We hope that our data, model, and new mechanism inspire others to develop other new mechanisms that
take advantage of the self-recovery and temperature effects
in 3D NAND flash memory.

Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous shepherd and reviewers for their
feedback. This work is partially supported by grants from
Huawei and Seagate, and gifts from Intel and Samsung.

References
[1] S. Arrhenius, “Über die Dissociationswärme und den Einfluß der Temperatur auf
den Dissociationsgrad der Elektrolyte,” Z. Phys. Chem., Jul. 1889.
[2] H. P. Belgal et al., “A New Reliability Model for Post-Cycling Charge Retention of
Flash Memories,” in IRPS, 2002.
[3] A. D. Birrell and B. J. Nelson, “Implementing Remote Procedure Calls,” TOCS, Feb.
1984.
[4] Y. Cai et al., “Error Characterization, Mitigation, and Recovery in Flash-MemoryBased Solid-State Drives,” Proc. IEEE, Sep. 2017.
[5] Y. Cai et al., “Errors in Flash-Memory-Based Solid-State Drives: Analysis, Mitigation, and Recovery,” arXiv:1711.11427 [cs.AR], 2017.
[6] Y. Cai et al., “Vulnerabilities in MLC NAND Flash Memory Programming: Experimental Analysis, Exploits, and Mitigation Techniques,” in HPCA, 2017.
[7] Y. Cai et al., “Read Disturb Errors in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Characterization
and Mitigation,” in DSN, 2015.
[8] Y. Cai et al., “Data Retention in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Characterization,
Optimization, and Recovery,” in HPCA, 2015.
[9] Y. Cai et al., “Flash Correct and Refresh: Retention Aware Management for Increased Lifetime,” in ICCD, 2012.
[10] Y. Cai et al., “Error Analysis and Retention-Aware Error Management for NAND
Flash Memory,” Intel Technol. J., May 2013.
[11] Y. Cai et al., “Error Patterns in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Measurement, Characterization, and Analysis,” in DATE, 2012.
[12] Y. Cai et al., “Threshold Voltage Distribution in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Characterization, Analysis, and Modeling,” in DATE, 2013.
[13] Y. Cai et al., “Program Interference in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Characterization, Modeling, and Mitigation,” in ICCD, 2013.
[14] Y. Cai et al., “Neighbor-Cell Assisted Error Correction for MLC NAND Flash Memories,” in SIGMETRICS, 2014.
[15] L.-P. Chang, “On Efficient Wear Leveling for Large-Scale Flash-Memory Storage
Systems,” in SAC, 2007.
[16] P. C. Y. Chen, “Threshold-Alterable Si-Gate MOS Devices,” TED, May 1977.
[17] R. Chen et al., “DHeating: Dispersed Heating Repair for Self-Healing NAND Flash
Memory,” in CODES+ISSS, 2013.
[18] B. Choi et al., “Comprehensive Evaluation of Early Retention (Fast Charge Loss
Within a Few Seconds) Characteristics in Tube-Type 3-D NAND Flash Memory,”
in VLSIT, 2016.
[19] W. Choi et al., “Exploiting Data Longevity for Enhancing the Lifetime of FlashBased Storage Class Memory,” in SIGMETRICS, 2017.
[20] C. M. Compagnoni et al., “Investigation of the Threshold Voltage Instability After
Distributed Cycling in Nanoscale NAND Flash Memory Arrays,” in IRPS, 2010.
[21] L. Crippa and R. Micheloni, “3D Charge Trap NAND Flash Memories,” in 3D Flash
Memories. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2016.
[22] B. Eitan, “Non-Volatile Semiconductor Memory Cell Utilizing Asymmetrical
Charge Trapping,” U.S. Patent 5,768,192, 1998.
[23] J. Elliott and J. Jeong, “Advancements in SSDs and 3D NAND Reshaping Storage
Market,” Keynote presentation at Flash Memory Summit, 2017.

14

