                                         Improving 3D NAND Flash Memory Lifetime
                                         by Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation

                                         YIXIN LUO, Carnegie Mellon University
arXiv:1807.05140v2 [cs.AR] 11 Nov 2018




                                         SAUGATA GHOSE, Carnegie Mellon University
                                         YU CAI, Carnegie Mellon University
                                         ERICH F. HARATSCH, Seagate Technology
                                         ONUR MUTLU, ETH Zürich & Carnegie Mellon University
                                         Compared to planar (i.e., two-dimensional) NAND flash memory, 3D NAND flash memory uses a new flash
                                         cell design, and vertically stacks dozens of silicon layers in a single chip. This allows 3D NAND flash memory
                                         to increase storage density using a much less aggressive manufacturing process technology than planar NAND
                                         flash memory. The circuit-level and structural changes in 3D NAND flash memory significantly alter how
                                         different error sources affect the reliability of the memory.
                                            In this paper, through experimental characterization of real, state-of-the-art 3D NAND flash memory chips,
                                         we find that 3D NAND flash memory exhibits three new error sources that were not previously observed in
                                         planar NAND flash memory: (1) layer-to-layer process variation, a new phenomenon specific to the 3D nature
                                         of the device, where the average error rate of each 3D-stacked layer in a chip is significantly different; (2) early
                                         retention loss, a new phenomenon where the number of errors due to charge leakage increases quickly within
                                         several hours after programming; and (3) retention interference, a new phenomenon where the rate at which
                                         charge leaks from a flash cell is dependent on the data value stored in the neighboring cell.
                                            Based on our experimental results, we develop new analytical models of layer-to-layer process variation
                                         and retention loss in 3D NAND flash memory. Motivated by our new findings and models, we develop four
                                         new techniques to mitigate process variation and early retention loss in 3D NAND flash memory. Our first
                                         technique, Layer Variation Aware Reading (LaVAR), reduces the effect of layer-to-layer process variation by
                                         fine-tuning the read reference voltage separately for each layer. Our second technique, Layer-Interleaved
                                         Redundant Array of Independent Disks (LI-RAID), uses information about layer-to-layer process variation to
                                         intelligently group pages under the RAID error recovery technique in a manner that reduces the likelihood
                                         that the recovery of a group fails significantly earlier than the recovery of other groups. Our third technique,
                                         Retention Model Aware Reading (ReMAR), reduces retention errors in 3D NAND flash memory by tracking
                                         the retention time of the data using our new retention model and adapting the read reference voltage to data
                                         age. Our fourth technique, Retention Interference Aware Neighbor-Cell Assisted Correction (ReNAC), adapts
                                         the read reference voltage to the amount of retention interference a page has experienced, in order to re-read
                                         the data after a read operation fails. These four techniques are complementary, and can be combined together
                                         to significantly improve flash memory reliability. Compared to a state-of-the-art baseline, our techniques,
                                         when combined, improve flash memory lifetime by 1.85×. Alternatively, if a NAND flash vendor wants to
                                         keep the lifetime of the 3D NAND flash memory device constant, our techniques reduce the storage overhead
                                         required to hold error correction information by 78.9%.
                                         CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization → Reliability; Secondary storage organization; •
                                         Hardware → Memory test and repair; Memory and dense storage; Non-volatile memory;
                                         Additional Key Words and Phrases: 3D NAND flash memory; error correction; fault tolerance; reliability;
                                         solid-state drives; storage systems
                                         ACM Reference Format:
                                         Y. Luo et al. 2018. Improving 3D NAND Flash Memory Lifetime by Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process
                                         Variation. Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst. (2018), 48 pages.

                                         1   INTRODUCTION
                                         Solid-state drives (SSDs), which consist of NAND flash memory chips, are a popular data storage
                                         medium in modern computer systems. Traditionally, NAND flash memory has employed a planar
2                                                                                                       Y. Luo et al.

(i.e., two-dimensional) architecture, where the entire chip resides on a single layer of silicon. In
planar NAND flash memory, a flash cell is made using a floating-gate transistor, where data is
represented by the amount of charge stored in the transistor’s floating gate. The amount of charge
stored in the floating gate determines the threshold voltage of the flash cell transistor (i.e., the
voltage at which the transistor turns on).
    For planar NAND flash memory, to continually increase the SSD capacity and decrease the cost-
per-bit of the SSD, flash vendors have been aggressively scaling NAND flash memory to smaller
manufacturing process technology nodes. This, however, comes at the cost of lower reliability [9, 13,
69]. Due to a combination of manufacturing process technology limitations and reduced reliability
of planar NAND flash memory, it has become increasingly difficult for vendors to continue to scale
the density of planar NAND flash memory chips [11, 31, 80].
    To overcome this scaling challenge, 3D NAND flash memory has recently been introduced [39,
45, 80]. Although 3D NAND flash memory is already being deployed at large scale in new computer
systems, there is a lack of available knowledge on the error characteristics of real 3D NAND flash
memory chips, which makes it harder to estimate the reliability characteristics of systems that
employ such chips. Previous publicly-available experimental studies on NAND flash memory errors
using real flash memory chips (e.g., [4–9, 11, 13–16, 64, 69, 81]) have mostly been on planar NAND
flash memory devices.1
    We identify that 3D NAND flash memory has three fundamental differences from the most recent
generation (i.e., 10–15 nm) of planar NAND flash memory, which lead to new error characteristics
for 3D NAND flash memory that we observe experimentally: (1) 3D NAND flash memory currently
uses a different flash cell architecture than planar NAND flash memory. Instead of using a floating-
gate transistor, a cell in 3D NAND flash memory consists of a charge trap transistor [86], which
stores charge within an insulator. (2) Unlike planar NAND flash memory, 3D NAND flash memory
vertically stacks multiple layers of silicon together within a single chip. Modern 3D NAND flash
memory chips typically contain 24–96 stack layers [1, 39, 45, 50, 80, 90]. Due to the high layer count,
3D NAND flash memory can provide high storage density without needing to scale the process
technology as aggressively as was done for planar NAND flash memory. (3) While modern planar
NAND flash memory uses a manufacturing process technology node as small as 10–15 nm [58, 90],
3D NAND flash memory currently uses a much larger manufacturing process technology node
(e.g., 30–50 nm [86]).
    Our goal in this work is to (1) identify and understand the new error characteristics of 3D
NAND flash memory (i.e., those that did not exist previously in planar NAND flash memory),
and (2) develop new techniques to mitigate prevailing 3D NAND flash memory errors. We aim to
achieve these goals via rigorous experimental characterization of real, state-of-the-art 3D NAND
flash memory chips from a major flash vendor. Based on our comprehensive characterization and
analysis, we identify three new error characteristics that were not previously observed in planar
NAND flash memory, but are fundamental to the new architecture of 3D NAND flash memory:
(1) 3D NAND flash memory exhibits layer-to-layer process variation, a new phenomenon specific
    to the 3D nature of the device, where the average error rate of each 3D-stacked layer in a chip
    is significantly different from one another (Section 4.2). We are the first to provide detailed
    experimental characterization results of layer-to-layer process variation in real flash devices in
    open literature. Our results show that the raw bit error rate in the middle layer can be 6× the
    raw bit error rate in the top layer.

1 With the exception of our very recent prior work [65], which examined two specific important aspects of 3D NAND flash

memory reliability: temperature and self-recovery effects.
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                         3

(2) 3D NAND flash memory experiences early retention loss, a new phenomenon where the number
    of errors due to charge leakage increases quickly within several hours after programming, but
    then increases at a much slower rate (Section 4.3). We are the first to perform an extended-
    duration observation of early retention loss. While a prior study [23] examines the impact of
    early retention loss over only the first 5 minutes after data is written, we examine the impact of
    early retention loss over the course of 24 days. Our results show that the retention error rate in
    a 3D NAND flash memory block quickly increases by an order of magnitude within ∼3 hours
    after programming.
(3) 3D NAND flash memory experiences retention interference, a new phenomenon where the
    rate at which charge leaks from a flash cell is dependent on the amount of charge stored in
    neighboring flash cells (Section 4.4). Our results show that charge leaks at a lower rate (i.e., the
    retention loss speed is slower) when the vertically-adjacent cell is in a state that holds more
    charge (i.e., a higher-voltage state).


   Our experimental observations indicate that we must revisit the error models and the error
mitigation mechanisms devised for planar NAND flash memory, as they are no longer accurate
for 3D NAND flash memory behavior. To this end, we develop new analytical models of (1) the
layer-to-layer process variation in 3D NAND flash memory (Section 5.1), and (2) retention loss in
3D NAND flash memory (Section 5.2). Our models estimate the raw bit error rate (RBER), threshold
voltage distribution, and the optimal read reference voltage (i.e., the voltage at which the RBER is
minimized when applied during a read operation) for each flash page. Both models are useful for
developing techniques to mitigate raw bit errors in 3D NAND flash memory.
   We propose four new techniques to mitigate the unique layer-to-layer process variation and
early retention loss errors observed in 3D NAND flash memory. Each technique makes use of our
new analytical models of layer-to-layer process variation and retention loss in 3D NAND flash
memory. Our first technique, Layer Variation Aware Reading (LaVAR), reduces process variation by
fine-tuning the read reference voltage independently for each layer. Our second technique, Layer-
Interleaved Redundant Array of Independent Disks (LI-RAID), improves reliability by changing
how pages are grouped under the RAID error recovery technique. LI-RAID uses information about
layer-to-layer process variation to reduce the likelihood that the RAID recovery of a group could
fail significantly earlier during the flash lifetime than the recovery of other groups. Our third
technique, Retention Model Aware Reading (ReMAR), reduces retention errors in 3D NAND flash
memory by tracking the retention time of the data using our retention model and adapting the
read reference voltage to data age. Our fourth technique, Retention Interference Aware Neighbor-
Cell Assisted Correction (ReNAC), adapts the read reference voltage to the amount of retention
interference and re-reads the data after a read operation fails, in order to correct the cells affected
by retention interference. These four techniques are complementary, and can be combined together
to significantly improve flash memory reliability. Compared to a state-of-the-art baseline, our
techniques, when combined, improve flash memory lifetime by 1.85×. Alternatively, if a NAND
flash vendor wants to keep the lifetime of the 3D NAND flash memory device constant, our
techniques reduce the storage overhead required to hold error correction information by 78.9%.
   This paper makes the following key contributions:
• It presents the first comprehensive experimental characterization of real, state-of-the-art 3D NAND
   flash memory chips, and provides an in-depth analysis of layer-to-layer process variation, early
   retention loss, and retention interference, which are three new error characteristics inherent to
   3D NAND flash memory.
 4                                                                                               Y. Luo et al.

 • It develops new analytical models for (1) layer-to-layer process variation and (2) early retention
   loss, which can be used to estimate the raw bit error rate, mean and standard deviation of the
   threshold voltage distribution of each state, and the optimal read reference voltages.
 • It develops four new mechanisms, LaVAR, LI-RAID, ReMAR, and ReNAC, to mitigate the three new
   error characteristics we have identified in 3D NAND flash memory. It evaluates these techniques,
   and shows that, when applied together, they improve 3D NAND flash memory lifetime by 1.85×,
   or reduce the storage overhead for error correction by 78.9% if we keep the lifetime constant,
   compared to a state-of-the-art baseline.

 2      BACKGROUND
 In this section, we first provide necessary background on the basics of NAND flash memory
 (Section 2.1). Next, we briefly discuss the different known sources of errors within planar NAND
 flash memory (Section 2.2). For an extended background on NAND flash memory, we refer the
 reader to our prior works [9–11].

 2.1          NAND Flash Memory Basics
 In NAND flash memory, each flash cell consists of a transistor that can store charge. A flash
 cell represents a certain data value based on the threshold voltage (Vth ) of its transistor, which
 is determined by the amount of charge stored in it. In multi-level cell (MLC) flash memory, each
 cell stores two bits of data. A threshold voltage window (i.e., state) is assigned for each possible
 two-bit value. Figure 1a shows the four possible states (i.e., ER, P1, P2, P3) in MLC NAND flash
 memory, along with their corresponding bit values. As a result of manufacturing process variation,
 the threshold voltage of cells programmed to the same state follow a Gaussian-like distribution
 across the voltage window of the state [9, 14, 64, 81], depicted as a probability density curve in
 Figure 1a.

                                                                                      Bitline
                                                      Page 6 (MSB)                   . . .         Wordline 2
                                                      Page 3 (LSB)
                    Va                     Vc Vpass
Probability




                                 Vb                   Page 4 (MSB)                   . . .          Wordline
 Density




                                                      Page 1 (LSB)                                  Wordline 1
               ER          P1         P2      P3      Page 2 (MSB)                   . . .         Wordline 0
               11          01         00      10      Page 0 (LSB)
                                                                                                 Flash Cell
                          Threshold Voltage (Vth)           Sense                     . . .
     MSB            LSB                                 Amplifiers
                                (a)                                            (b)

 Fig. 1. (a) Threshold voltage distribution and read reference voltages for MLC NAND flash memory; (b) Internal
 organization of a flash block.


    A NAND flash memory chip contains thousands of flash blocks, which are two-dimensional
 arrays of flash cells. Figure 1b shows the internal organization of a flash block. Each block contains
 dozens of rows (i.e., wordlines) of flash cells, where each row typically contains 64K to 128K cells.
 All of the cells on the same wordline are read and programmed together as a group. MLC NAND
 flash memory partitions the two bits of each flash cell in a wordline across two pages, which are
 the unit of data programmed at a time (typically 8 kB). The least significant bits (LSBs) of all cells in
 one wordline form the LSB page of that wordline, and the most significant bits (MSBs) of these cells
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                          5

form the MSB page. The sources and drains of cells across different wordlines in the same block are
connected in series to form a bitline.
   Reads and writes to the flash memory are managed by an SSD controller. The controller reads a
page from a flash block by applying a read reference voltage (Vr ef ) to the wordline that holds the
page. A cell switches on only if Vt h > Vr e f . Figure 1a shows the three read reference voltages (Va ,
Vb , and Vc ) that are used to distinguish between each state. A sense amplifier is attached to each
bitline to detect if the cell is switched on. In order to detect the state of a particular cell on the
bitline, the controller applies a pass-through voltage (Vpass ) to the wordlines of all unread cells in
the flash block. This turns on the unread cells, allowing the value of the cell that is being read to
propagate through the bitline to the sense amplifier. To guarantee that all unread cells are on, Vpass
is set to the maximum possible threshold voltage [5, 9].
   Before new data can be written (i.e., programmed) to a flash page, the controller must first erase the
entire block (i.e., 512 to 1024 pages) that the page belongs to, due to wiring constraints. After erase,
all of the cells in the erased block are reset to the ER state. To program a flash cell, the controller
sends the data to be programmed to the flash chip, which repeatedly pulses a high programming
voltage on a cell to increase a cell’s threshold voltage until the cell reaches its target state. This
iterative programming approach is called incremental step pulse programming (ISPP) [3, 69, 89, 91].
Each pair of erase and program operations is referred to as a program/erase (P/E) cycle.

2.2   Errors in NAND Flash Memory
As vendors work to increase the density of NAND flash memory, they use aggressive manufacturing
process technology scaling to reduce the size of a flash cell. As a result, each cell has a smaller
capacity to store charge, and the cells move closer to each other. These changes reduce the reliability
of the NAND flash memory, thereby increasing the probability of flash memory errors in newer
generations of planar (i.e., two-dimensional) NAND flash memory. Errors occur when the cell
threshold voltage (Vt h ) unintentionally changes or is read incorrectly, which can alter the cell state
observed by the controller. Errors can be induced by a range of sources [4–9, 11, 13–16, 65, 69],
which we divide into four categories: process variation errors, retention errors, write-induced
errors, and read-induced errors. We briefly describe each error source below, and refer the reader
to the prior work cited below for detailed explanations of each error source. A comprehensive
treatment of different types of NAND flash memory errors and mitigation mechanisms for them
can be found in our recent survey papers [9, 11].
   Process variation errors occur as a result of the fabrication process. Within a single chip, different
flash cells have different attributes, due to the lithography limitations of modern manufacturing
process technologies [13, 84]. As a result, there is inherent variation among the cells, and some
cells have a higher error rate than other cells.
   Retention errors [6–8] are a type of error that increase and accumulate over time after a flash cell
is programmed. A retention error occurs because charge leaks out of the transistor over time. As
charge leaks from a cell, the cell’s threshold voltage (Vth ) decreases. In planar NAND flash memory,
retention errors are the dominant source of all flash memory errors [6–8, 13], if aggressive refresh
techniques [7, 8, 63] are not employed.
   Write-induced errors occur during program or erase operations. P/E cycling errors (or pro-
gram/erase variation errors) [14, 64, 81] are errors that occur immediately after erasing and pro-
gramming a flash page. These errors occur because of the inaccuracy of each program and erase
operation. This inaccuracy causes some cells to be programmed into a state other than its desired
target state. As more P/E cycles take place over the lifetime of a flash cell, the repeated stress causes
more electrons to become trapped within the transistor, which is known as wearout. Wearout
increases the inaccuracy during program and erase operations, thereby increasing the number of
6                                                                                           Y. Luo et al.

P/E cycling errors. Cell-to-cell program interference errors [15, 16] are another type of write-induced
error that increases the threshold voltage of a cell and thereby increases the RBER, when an adjacent
cell in another wordline is being programmed. Since parasitic capacitance coupling exists between
cells within close proximity of each other, when a high programming voltage is applied on one
cell, the capacitance coupling adds charge to the transistors of the adjacent cells, increasing the
program interference errors.
   Read-induced errors occur during read operations. Read errors [24, 29, 42] are a type of read-
induced error where two reads to a flash cell may return different data values. A read error occurs
when the read reference voltage is close to the cell’s threshold voltage. Such an error occurs when
random fluctuations on the bitline cause the sense amplifier to detect the wrong data. Read disturb
errors [5, 81] are another type of read-induced error where reading a page in a flash block may
change the values stored in (i.e., increase the RBER) of other pages in the same block. This type of
error occurs due to the application of the pass-through voltage (Vpass ) to unread cells. When one cell
on a bitline is being read, applying Vpass to the unread cells can induce a weak programming effect
on the unread cells, slowly transferring electrons into the unread cells’ transistors and increasing
the threshold voltage of the unread cells.
   To mitigate these errors, SSDs use error-correcting codes (ECC) on the data. ECC has a fixed
error correction capability: it can correct only a limited number of errors, beyond which the data is
no longer correctable. When a flash page is uncorrectable, we say that the SSD has reached the end
of its lifetime.

3   ARCHITECTURAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN 3D NAND AND PLANAR NAND
3D NAND flash memory (or 3D NAND) has three fundamental differences from the most recent gen-
eration (i.e., 10–15 nm) of planar NAND flash memory: (1) the flash cell design, (2) the organization
of flash cells within a chip, and (3) the manufacturing process technology node.
   Flash Cell Design. In both planar and 3D NAND flash memory, each flash cell consists of a
transistor that can store charge, where the amount of charge determines the threshold voltage of
the cell (i.e., the voltage at which the cell turns on). The vast majority of planar NAND flash memory
uses a floating-gate transistor (FG) for each cell. Figure 2a illustrates the design of a floating-gate
cell. A control gate sits at the top of the transistor. Read, program, and erase operations all apply
a voltage onto the control gate to turn on the cell or to add charge to the transistor. A floating
gate sits in the middle of the transistor. The floating gate is a conductor that stores the transistor’s
charge, and is sandwiched by oxide layers. The oxide layers minimize the amount of charge that
leaks out of the floating gate. At the bottom of the cell is the substrate, which has two terminals on
either end, marked source (S) and drain (D). When the voltage applied on the control gate is higher
than the voltage of the charge stored in the floating gate, an electrical channel forms between the
source and drain, connecting them together. The floating gate voltage can be increased or decreased
by applying a large positive or negative voltage, respectively, to the control gate, which induces
Fowler-Nordheim tunneling [27] of electrons through the oxide.
   Instead of floating-gate transistors, most existing 3D NAND flash memory designs use a charge
trap transistor (CT) for each cell. Figure 2b illustrates the design of a charge trap cell. The substrate,
and therefore the channel between source and drain, sits vertically in the center of the cell. A
charge trap layer wraps around the substrate. The charge trap layer takes the place of the floating
gate, storing the transistor’s charge. However, unlike the floating gate, the charge trap layer is an
insulator. The control gate still exists in a charge trap cell, but it now wraps around the charge trap
layer.
   Flash Chip Organization. Figure 3 illustrates the physical organization of flash cells in 3D
NAND flash memory. The charge trap transistor design allows the bitline (BL in Figure 3) of a
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                            7


                       Control                                        S
                                                                                    Charge Trap
                        Gate                                                        (Insulator)
                                     Oxide




                                                                    Substrate
                                      Floating Gate                                   Control
                                      (Conductor)                                      Gate

                 S                   D
                      Substrate                                       D


                (a) Floating-Gate Cell                    (b) 3D Charge Trap Cell

                Fig. 2. The design of (a) a floating-gate cell, and (b) a 3D charge trap cell.



block to stand vertically (i.e., along the z-axis) in the chip. In other words, the bitline now connects
together one charge trap cell from each layer of the chip, as the cells are stacked on top of each
other. Note that all of the cells along the z-axis share the same charge trap insulator, akin to how
transistors are connected together on a bitline in planar NAND flash memory. The control gates of
cells in the same layer, along the y-axis, are connected together to form a wordline. In this figure,
we show a simple example where the cells in the same y–z plane form a flash block. In reality, to
form larger flash blocks, multiple stacks of flash cells are connected together to form longer bitlines,
thus increasing the number of wordlines within a block. Multiple such flash blocks are aligned
along the x-axis to form a flash chip.


               Block K+2
             Block K+1
           Block K      BL N             …         BL 1            BL 0                   Substrate

                                                                                          Charge trap
            Layer M                      …
                                      Wordline M                                          Control gate
                       …
                             …
                                  …


                                              …


                                                          …
                                                               …


                                                                                …




            Layer 1                      …
                                      Wordline 1

            Layer 0                      …                                            z
                                      Wordline 0                                           x
                                                                                                y

                              Fig. 3. 3D NAND flash memory organization.


   Manufacturing Process Technology. Compared with the most recent generation of planar
NAND flash memory (i.e., 10–15 nm), 3D NAND flash memory uses a much larger manufacturing
process technology node (e.g., 30–50 nm) [86]. Because 3D NAND flash memory has a large number
of layers (typically 24–96 [1, 39, 45, 50, 80, 90]), it can reach the same storage density of the most
recent planar NAND flash memory generation while using much larger flash cells.
8                                                                                                         Y. Luo et al.

4     CHARACTERIZATION OF 3D NAND FLASH MEMORY ERRORS
Our goal is to identify and understand new error characteristics in 3D NAND flash memory,
through rigorous experimental characterization of real, state-of-the-art 3D NAND flash memory
chips. We use the observations and analyses obtained from such characterization to (1) compare
how the reliability of a 3D NAND flash memory chip differs from that of a planar NAND flash
memory chip, (2) develop a model of how each new error source affects the error rate of 3D NAND
flash memory, (3) understand if and how these reliability characteristics will change with future
generations of 3D NAND flash memory, and (4) develop mechanisms that can mitigate new error
sources in 3D NAND flash memory.
   For our characterization, we use the methodology discussed in Section 4.1. First, we perform a
detailed characterization and analysis of three error characteristics that are drastically different
in 3D NAND flash memory than in planar NAND flash memory: layer-to-layer process variation
(Section 4.2), early retention loss (Section 4.3), and retention interference (Section 4.4). In addition to
identifying new error sources in 3D NAND flash memory, we use our methodology to corroborate
and quantify 3D NAND error characteristics that are a result of error sources that were previously
identified in planar NAND flash memory, including retention loss [6–9, 11, 23, 80], P/E cycling [9,
11, 14, 64, 80, 81], program interference [4, 9, 11, 15, 16, 80], read disturb [5, 9, 11, 81], and process
variation [13, 84]. We summarize our findings for these error types in Section 4.5, and provide
detailed results on our characterization of these previously-identified error sources in Appendix A.

4.1    Methodology
We experimentally characterize several real, state-of-the-art 3D MLC NAND flash memory chips
from a single vendor.2, 3 We use a NAND flash characterization platform similar to prior work [4–
9, 11–16, 64, 65, 81], which allows us to issue read-retry commands directly to the flash chip. The
read-retry command [9, 14] allows us to fine-tune the read reference voltage used for each read
operation. The smallest amount by which we can change the read reference voltage is called a
voltage step. We conduct all experiments at room temperature (20 ◦C).
   We use two metrics to evaluate 3D NAND flash memory reliability. First, we show the raw bit
error rate (RBER), which is the rate at which errors occur in the data before error correction. We
show the RBER for when we read data using the optimal read reference voltage (Vopt ), which is the
read reference voltage that generates the fewest errors in the data.4
   Second, we show how the various error sources change the threshold voltage distribution. These
changes (i.e., shifting and widening) in threshold voltage distribution directly lead to raw bit errors
in the flash memory. To obtain the distribution, we first use the read-retry command to sweep over
all possible voltage values, to identify the threshold voltage of each cell.5 Then, we use this data to
calculate the probability density of each state at every possible threshold voltage value. As part of
our analysis, we fit the threshold voltage distribution of each state to a Gaussian distribution. We
use the mean of the Gaussian model to represent how the distribution shifts as a result of errors, and
we use the standard deviation of the model to represent how the distribution widens. Throughout
this paper, we present normalized voltage values, as the actual voltage values are proprietary to
NAND flash memory vendors. A normalized voltage of 1 represents a single fixed voltage step.
2 The trends we observe from the characterization are expected be similar for 3D charge trap flash memory manufactured

by different vendors, as their 3D flash memory organizations are similar in design.
3 We normalize the actual number of stacked layers of the chips and leave out the exact process technology to protect the

anonymity of the flash vendor and to avoid revealing proprietary information.
4 We show RBER at the optimal read reference voltage to accurately represent the reliability of NAND flash memory, as SSD

controllers tune the read reference voltage to a near-optimal point to extend the NAND flash lifetime [6, 9, 64, 76].
5 We refer to prior work for more detail on the methodology to obtain the threshold voltage distribution [14, 64, 81].
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                                            9

   We show two examples in Figure 4 to visualize how well this simple Gaussian model captures the
change in the measured threshold voltage distribution. Figure 4 shows the measured and modeled
distributions under two conditions: (1) after 0 P/E cycles, 0-day retention time [6], and 0 read
disturbs (i.e., the data contains few errors); and (2) after 10K P/E cycles, 3-day retention time [6],
and 900K read disturbs (i.e., the data contains a high number of errors). Dotted points plot the
measured threshold voltage distributions from the real 3D NAND memory chips. Note that we
are unable to show the ER state distribution when the P/E cycle count is low (i.e., the black dots),
because the erase operation cleanly resets the threshold voltage to a negative value that is lower
than the observable voltage range under a low P/E cycle count. We use a solid line to show a fitted
Gaussian distribution for each state. The Kullback-Leibler divergence error values [64, 81] of the
fitted Gaussian distributions are 0.034 and 0.23.6 We observe, from this figure, that after the chip is
used, the threshold voltage distribution shifts due to P/E cycling, retention loss, and read disturb,
reducing the error margins between neighboring states, and leading to more raw bit errors in the
data. Thus, depicting and understanding how threshold voltage distributions are affected by various
factors helps us understand how raw bit errors occur and thus devise mechanisms to mitigate
various errors more effectively.

                                           0.05
                                                           0 P/E Cycles, 0-Day Retention, 0 Reads
                                                           10K P/E Cycles, 3-Day Retention, 900K Reads
                                           0.04
                     Probability Density




                                           0.03
                                                      ER
                                           0.02


                                           0.01
                                                                         P1            P2         P3
                                           0.00
                                                  0          50       100       150        200    250    300
                                                                            Normalized Vth


Fig. 4. 3D NAND threshold voltage distribution before (black) and after (red) the data is subject to a high
number of errors (due to P/E cycling, retention loss, and read disturb).


   In the following sections, we directly show the mean and the standard deviation of the fitted
threshold voltage distributions instead of the distribution itself, to simplify the presentation of our
results.
   Limitations. In our experiments, we randomly sampled 27 flash blocks throughout our char-
acterizations. Note that each sampled flash block consists of tens of millions of flash cells. Thus,
we believe that our observations are representative of the general behavior that takes place in the
model of 3D NAND chips that we tested. While adding more data samples (i.e., flash blocks to
test) can add to the statistical strength of our results, we do not believe that this would change
the general qualitative findings that we make and the models that we develop in this work. This is
because the new error characteristics we observe are caused by the underlying architecture of 3D
NAND flash memory (see Section 3).

6 A KL-divergence error of x means that the model loses x natural units of information (i.e., nats) due to modeling error.
10                                                                                        Y. Luo et al.

  Note that we do not characterize chip-to-chip process variation, as an accurate study of such
variation requires a large-scale study of a large number (e.g., hundreds) of 3D NAND flash memory
chips, which we do not have access to. Hence, we leave such a large-scale study for future work.

4.2   Layer-to-Layer Process Variation
Process variation refers to the variation in the attributes of flash cells when they are fabricated
(see Section 2.2). Due to process variation, some flash cells can have a higher RBER than others,
making these cells the limiting factor of overall flash memory reliability. In 3D NAND flash memory,
process variation can occur along all three axes of the memory (see Figure 3). Among the three axes,
we expect the variation along the z-axis (i.e., layer-to-layer variation) to be the most significant,
due to the new challenge of stacking multiple flash cells across layers. Prior work has shown that
current circuit etching technologies are unable to produce identical 3D NAND cells when punching
through multiple stacked layers, leading to significant variation in the error characteristics of flash
cells that reside in different layers [38, 92].
   To characterize layer-to-layer process variation errors within a flash block, we first wear out
the block by programming random data to each page in the block until the block endures 10K P/E
cycles. Then, we compare the collective characteristics of the flash cells in one layer with those
in another layer. We repeat this experiment for flash blocks on multiple chips to verify all of our
findings.
   Observations. Figure 5 shows the RBER variation along the z-axis (i.e., across layers) for a flash
block that has endured 10K P/E cycles. The chips we use for characterization have between 30 and
40 layers. We normalize the number of layers from 0 (the top-most layer) to 100 (the bottom-most
layer) by multiplying the actual layer number with a constant, to maintain the anonymity of the
chip vendors. Figure 5a breaks down the errors according to the originally-programmed state and
the current state of each cell; Figure 5b breaks down the errors into MSB and LSB page errors. In
Figure 5b, the solid curve and the dotted curve show the results for two blocks that were randomly
selected from two different flash chips. We make five observations from Figure 5. First, ER ↔ P1
and P1 ↔ P2 errors vary significantly across layers, while P2 ↔ P3 errors remain similar across
layers. The variation in ER ↔ P1 errors is mainly caused by the large variation in mean threshold
voltage of the ER state across layers; the variation in P1 ↔ P2 is caused by the variation in the
threshold voltage distribution width of the P1 state across layers (Section A.4). Second, both the
MSB and LSB error rates vary significantly across layers. We call this phenomenon layer-to-layer
process variation. For example, MSB page on normalized layer 55 in the middle (i.e., Max MSB) has
an RBER 21× that of normalized layer 0. Third, MSB error rates are much higher than LSB error
rates in a majority of the layers, on average by 2.4×. We call this phenomenon MSB–LSB RBER
variation. MSB error rates are usually higher than LSB error rates because reading an MSB page
requires two read reference voltages (Va and Vc ), whereas reading an LSB page requires only one
(Vb ). Fourth, the top half of the layers have lower error rates than the bottom half. This is likely
caused by the variation in the flash cell size across layers. Fifth, the RBER variation we observe
is consistent across two randomly-selected blocks from two different chips. This indicates that
layer-to-layer process variation and MSB–LSB RBER variation are consistent characteristics of 3D
NAND flash memory.
   Figure 6 shows how the optimal read reference voltages vary across layers. Three subfigures show
the optimal read reference voltages for Va , Vb , and Vc . We make two observations from Figure 6.
First, the optimal voltages for Va and Vb vary significantly across layers, but the optimal voltage for
Vc does not change by much. This is because process variation mainly affects the threshold voltage
distributions of the ER and P1 states, whereas the threshold voltage distributions of the P2 and P3
states, which are more accurately controlled by ISPP (see Section 2), are similar across layers. We
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                                         11


                                                  ER ↔ P1                                                   (a)
                                  3×10− 4         P1 ↔ P2
                   RBER                           P2 ↔ P3
                                  2×10− 4

                                  1×10− 4

                                          0

                                  4×10− 4
                                                  MSB (another chip)                                        (b)
                                                  LSB (another chip)
                                  3×10− 4         MSB                            Max MSB
                   RBER




                                                  LSB
                                  2×10− 4

                                  1×10− 4
                                                                            Max LSB
                                          0
                                                0   10      20     30 40 50 60 70 80                    90 100
                                              (top)               Normalized Layer Number                (bottom)


                                                 Fig. 5. Variation of RBER across layers.


discuss this further in Appendix A.4. Second, the optimal read reference voltages for Va and Vb are
lower for cells in the top half of the layers than for cells in the bottom half. This is because process
variation significantly affects the threshold voltage of the ER and P1 states (see Appendix A.4).

                                       (a) Optimal Va               (b) Optimal Vb               (c) Optimal Vc
                                  82
                                                            154                            222
                                  80
                                                            152                            220
                 Normalized Vth




                                  78
                                                            150                            218
                                  76
                                                            148                            216
                                  74
                                                            146                            214
                                  72
                                                            144                            212
                                  70
                                     0       50     100             0       50     100         0       50     100
                                  Normalized Layer Number        Normalized Layer Number    Normalized Layer Number


                                   Fig. 6. Variation of optimal read reference voltage across layers.

   Insights. We show that the phenomena of layer-to-layer process variation and MSB-LSB RBER
variation, which are unique to 3D NAND flash memory, are significant. We refer to Appendix A.4
for a comparison between layer-to-layer process variation and bitline-to-bitline process variation.
In the future, as 3D NAND flash devices scale along the z-axis, more layers will be stacked vertically
along each bitline. This will likely further exacerbate the effect of layer-to-layer process variation,
making it even more important to study and mitigate its negative effects.

4.3   Early Retention Loss
Retention errors are flash memory errors that accumulate after data has been programmed to the
flash cells [6–8] (see Section 2.2). Because 3D NAND flash memory typically uses a different cell
12                                                                                                      Y. Luo et al.

design (i.e., the charge trap cell described in Section 3) than planar NAND flash memory (which
uses floating-gate cells), it has drastically different retention error characteristics. The charge
trap flash cells used in 3D NAND flash memory suffer from early retention loss, i.e., fast charge
loss within a few seconds. This phenomenon has been observed by prior works using circuit-
level characterization [21, 23]. However, due to limitations of the circuit-level characterization
methodology used by these prior works, openly-available characterizations of early retention loss
in 3D charge trap NAND flash devices document retention loss behavior for up to only 5 minutes
after the data is written (i.e., for a maximum retention time of 5 minutes). This limited window is
insufficient for understanding early retention loss under real workloads, which typically have much
longer retention time requirements [63], i.e., the length of time that has elapsed since programming
until the data is accessed again.
   Our goal is to experimentally characterize early retention loss in 3D NAND flash memory for
a large range of retention times (e.g., from several minutes to several weeks). First, we randomly
select 11 flash blocks within each chip and write pseudo-random data to each page within the block
to wear the blocks out. We wear out each block to a different P/E cycle count, so that we have error
data for every 1K P/E cycles between 0 and 10K P/E cycles.7 Then, we program pseudo-random data
to each flash block, and wait for up to 24 days under room temperature. To characterize retention
loss, we measure the RBER and the threshold voltage distribution at nine different retention times,
ranging from 7 minutes to 24 days. To minimize the impact of other errors, and to allow us to
include very low retention times, we characterize only the first 72 flash pages within each block.
We believe that the observations we make on these flash cells are representative of the entire chip,
and we can generalize the observations to a majority of 3D NAND flash memory cells. We analyze
the threshold voltage distribution in Appendix A.2.
   Observations. Figure 7 shows the comparison between the retention error rate of 3D NAND
and planar NAND flash memory at 10,000 P/E cycles using both a logarithmic time scale on the
x-axis (Figure 7a) and a linear time scale on the x-axis (Figure 7b) for different retention times
after programming. To make this comparison, we perform the same experiment as above for
planar NAND flash memory chips. Due to limitations of the available data, we extend our data
to the same retention time range using a linear model that was proposed by prior work [65, 69]:
log(RBER) = A · log(t) + B, where t is the retention time, and A and B are parameters of the linear
model. The dotted portions of the lines represent the RBER that is predicted by the linear model.
   We make two observations from this figure. First, in Figure 7a, we observe that the retention
error rate changes much more slowly for planar NAND flash memory than for 3D NAND flash
memory. Although the 3D NAND flash memory chip has lower RBER than the planar NAND flash
memory chip shortly after programming, the RBER becomes higher on the 3D NAND flash memory
chip after 7 × 103 seconds (∼2 hours) of retention time. This means that 3D NAND flash memory is
more susceptible to the retention loss phenomenon than planar NAND flash memory. Second, in
Figure 7b, we observe that the RBER of 3D NAND flash memory quickly increases by an order of
magnitude in 104 seconds (∼3 hours), and by another order of magnitude in 106 seconds (∼11 days).
However, we do not observe a large difference in retention loss between low and high retention
times for planar NAND flash memory (also shown by prior works [6, 69]). This shows that the
retention loss is steep when retention time is low, but the retention loss flattens out when the
retention time is high. This is a result of the early retention loss phenomenon in 3D NAND flash
memory.


7 For all experiments throughout the paper, we consistently assume a 0.5-second dwell time, which is the length of time

between consecutive program/erase operations [65].
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                             13

   Early retention loss can be caused by two possible reasons. First, the tunnel oxide layer is thinner
in 3D NAND flash memory than in planar NAND flash memory [86, 97]. Since a 3D charge trap cell
uses an insulator to store charge, which is immune to the short circuiting caused by stress-induced
leakage current (SILC) [26, 73], the tunnel oxide layer in 3D NAND flash memory is designed to
be thinner to improve programming speed [80]. This causes charge to leak very fast soon after
programming. Second, cells connected on the same bitline share the same charge trap layer. As a
result, charge that is programmed to a flash cell quickly leaks to adjacent cells that are on the same
bitline due to electron diffusion through the shared charge trap layer [23], which we discuss further
in Section 4.4.

                          100                                     100
                                      3D NAND
                         10− 1        Planar NAND                10− 1

                         10− 2                                   10− 2
                  RBER




                                                          RBER

                         10− 3                                   10− 3

                         10− 4                                   10− 4
                                     (a) Logarithmic                             (b) Linear
                              −5                                      −5
                         10                                      10
                                   103 104 105 106 107                     0    1×107 2×107 3×107
                                     Retention Time (s)                        Retention Time (s)



Fig. 7. Retention error rate comparison between 3D NAND and planar NAND flash memory at 10K P/E cycles.
Dotted portions of lines represent the RBER predicted by the linear model proposed by prior work [65, 69].
We show the retention time on the x-axis using both (a) a logarithmic time scale and (b) a linear time scale.


   Figure 8 plots how the optimal read reference voltage changes with retention time. The three
subfigures show the optimal voltages for Va , Vb , and Vc . We make three observations from this
figure. First, the relation between the optimal read reference voltages of Vb or Vc and the retention
time can be modeled as [65, 69]: V = A · log(t) + B, similar to the logarithm of RBER (which we
discuss above). Second, the optimal read reference voltages for Vb and Vc decrease significantly as
retention time increases, whereas Va remains relatively constant. Third, due to the early retention
loss phenomenon, the optimal read reference voltages for Vb and Vc change rapidly when the
retention time is low (e.g., Vc changes by 5 voltage steps within the first 3 hours), but they change
slowly when the retention time is high (e.g., Vc changes by another 5 voltage steps after 11 days).
   Insights. We compare the errors caused by retention loss in 3D NAND flash memory to that
in planar NAND flash memory, using our results in Figure 7 and the results reported in prior
work [6, 7, 69]. We find two major differences in 3D NAND flash memory, which we summarize
below. More results and insights are in Appendix A.2. First, 3D NAND flash memory is more
susceptible to retention errors than planar NAND flash memory, and its error rate increases much
faster when the retention time is low than when the retention time is high. This is a result of the
early retention loss phenomenon in 3D NAND flash memory, which is due to the use of a different
flash cell design and thus is likely to remain in future generations of 3D NAND flash memory.
Second, the optimal read reference voltages for Vb and Vc in 3D NAND flash memory change
significantly with retention time. However, in planar NAND flash memory, the optimal voltage
for Vb does not change by much [6], indicating that retention loss is a more pressing phenomenon
in 3D NAND flash memory. This makes adjusting the optimal read reference voltages even more
important for 3D NAND flash memory than for planar NAND flash memory. We conclude that it is
14                                                                                                                                  Y. Luo et al.

                                             (a) Optimal Va                   (b) Optimal Vb                 (c) Optimal Vc
                                                                    152
                                     78                                                             220
                                                                    150
                                     76                                                             218
                                                                    148
                                     74                                                             216
                    Normalized Vth



                                                                    146
                                     72                                                             214
                                                                    144
                                     70                                                             212
                                                                    142
                                     68                                                             210
                                                                    140
                                     66                                                             208         Measured
                                                                    138
                                     64                                                             206         Linear Fit
                                                                    136
                                          102 103 104 105 106 107         102 103 104 105 106 107         102 103 104 105 106 107
                                            Retention Time (s)              Retention Time (s)              Retention Time (s)



Fig. 8. Optimal read reference voltages for different retention times. Note that the x-axis uses a logarithmic
time scale.


necessary to develop novel mechanisms to mitigate the early retention loss phenomenon in 3D
NAND flash memory.

4.4     Retention Interference
Retention interference is the phenomenon that the speed of retention loss for a cell depends on the
threshold voltage of a vertically-adjacent neighbor cell whose charge trap layer is directly connected
to the victim cell along the bitline. Retention interference is unique to 3D NAND flash memory, as
cells along the same bitline in 3D NAND flash memory share the same charge trap layer. If two
neighboring cells have different threshold voltages over time, charge can leak away from the cell
with a higher threshold voltage to the cell with a lower threshold voltage [23]. Figure 9 shows an
example of this phenomenon, where charge leaks from the top cell (which is in a higher-voltage
state) to the bottom cell (which is in a lower-voltage state) through the shared charge trap layer.
This charge leakage reduces the threshold voltage of the top cell while increasing the threshold
voltage of the bottom cell.


                                                                          S
                                                                                            Vertically-
                                                                                             adjacent
                                                                                               cell

                                                                      D/S
                                                                                             Retention
                                                                                           interference
                                                                                               Victim
                                                                                                cell

                                                                          D


      Fig. 9. Retention interference phenomenon: a vertically-adjacent cell leaks charge into a victim cell.

   We use the same data used for retention loss in Section 4.3 to observe the effects of retention
interference. To eliminate any noise due to program interference, we use only the neighboring cells
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                       15

that are programmed before the victim cells to establish the retention interference correlation, as
these cells do not induce program interference on the victim cells. We also ignore victim cells that
are in the ER state, as they are significantly affected by program interference even though they are
programmed after their neighbors [4]. Once program interference is eliminated, the cells should
experience a similar threshold voltage shift due to retention loss except for the effects of retention
interference. To find the retention interference, we first group all of the victim cells based on their
threshold voltage states and the states of their neighboring cells. Then, we compare the amount by
which the threshold voltages shift over a 24-day retention time, for each group, to observe how the
cells are affected by the retention interference caused by neighboring cells.
   Observations. Figure 10 shows the average threshold voltage shift over a 24-day retention time,
broken down by the state of the victim cell (V) and the state of the neighboring cell (N). Each bar
represents a different (V, N) pair. Different shades represent the different states of the neighboring
cell, as labeled in the legend. Every 4 bars are grouped by the state of the victim cell, as labeled on
the y-axis. The length of each bar represents the amount of threshold voltage shift over the 24-day
retention time. From Figure 10, we observe that the threshold voltage shift over retention time is
lower when the neighboring cell is in a higher-voltage state (e.g., the P3 state).


               V=P3
                                                                                        N=P3
               V=P2                                                                     N=P2
                                           The higher the neighbor-cell state,
                                                                                        N=P1
               V=P1                                                                     N=ER
                                           the lower the threshold voltage shift
                      0              5               10             15             20
                          # of Voltage Steps Shifted Over 24-Day Retention Time

                Fig. 10. Retention interference phenomenon observed at 10K P/E cycles.


   Insights. We are the first to quantify the retention interference phenomenon in 3D NAND flash
memory. Our observation from Figure 10 shows that the amount of retention loss for a flash cell is
correlated with its neighboring cell’s state. We expect retention interference to become stronger as
we shrink the manufacturing process technology node in future 3D NAND flash memory devices.
This is because the distance between neighboring cells will decrease, and fewer electrons will be
stored within each flash cell, increasing the susceptibility of a cell to interference from neighboring
cells.

4.5   Other Error Characteristics
In addition to the three new error sources we find in 3D NAND flash memory, we also characterize
the behavior of other known error sources in 3D NAND flash memory and compare them to their
behavior in planar NAND flash memory. We present a high-level summary of our findings for these
errors here, and provide detailed results and analyses for them in Appendix A:
• Unlike in planar NAND flash memory, we do not find any evidence of program errors [4, 64, 81]
   in 3D NAND flash memory (Section A.1.1).
• P/E cycling error in 3D NAND flash memory follows a linear trend, which is similar to that
   in planar NAND flash memory using an older manufacturing process technology node (e.g.,
   20–24 nm) [14]. However, in sub-20 nm planar NAND flash memory, P/E cycling error exhibits a
   power law trend [64, 81] (Appendix A.1.2).
• 3D NAND flash memory experiences 40% less program interference than 20–24 nm planar NAND
   flash memory (Appendix A.1.3).
16                                                                                         Y. Luo et al.

• 3D NAND flash memory experiences 96.7% weaker read disturb than 20–24 nm planar NAND
  flash memory. The impact of read disturb is low enough in 3D NAND flash memory that it does
  not require significant error mitigation (Appendix A.3.2).
Note that these differences are mainly due to the larger manufacturing process technology nodes
currently used in 3D NAND flash memory, and thus are not the focus of this paper. In comparison,
the new error characteristics that we focus on (layer-to-layer process variation, early retention loss,
and retention interference) are caused by the architectural and circuit-level changes introduced in
3D NAND flash memory.

4.6   Summary
We summarize the key differences between 3D NAND and planar NAND flash memory, in terms
of error characteristics and the expected trends for future 3D NAND flash memory devices, in
Table 1. The first column of this table lists each attribute that we study. The second column shows
the key difference in the observation that we find in 3D NAND flash memory versus planar NAND
flash memory, for each attribute that we study. The third column shows the fundamental cause
of each difference. The last column describes the expected trend of this difference in future 3D
NAND flash memory devices. We provide the necessary characterizations and models that help us
quantitatively understand these differences in Appendix A.1.2, A.1.3, A.2, A.3.1, A.3.2, and A.4.

5 3D NAND FLASH MEMORY ERROR MODELS
In the previous sections, we have established a basic understanding of the similarities and differences
between 3D NAND and planar NAND flash memory in terms of error characteristics and reliability.
In this section, we quantify these differences by developing analytical models of the process
variation (Section 5.1) and retention loss (Section 5.2) phenomena in 3D NAND flash memory.
These models are useful for at least two major purposes. First, the insights obtained from using
these models can motivate and enable us to develop new error mitigation mechanisms for 3D
NAND flash memory. Second, the retention model and the model parameters are also useful for
comparing the reliability of newer or older generations of planar NAND flash memory with our
tested 3D NAND flash memory chips. We focus on developing these models using our existing
characterization data from real 3D NAND flash memory chips (some of which was presented in
Section 4). In Section 6, we discuss (1) how to efficiently learn the models for each chip online within
the SSD controller by performing the characterization and model fitting online, and (2) how to use
the online models to develop mechanisms that improve the lifetime of 3D NAND flash memory.

5.1   RBER Variation Model
Since the layer-to-layer variation in 3D NAND flash memory causes variation in RBER within a
flash block, it is no longer sufficient to use a single RBER value to represent the reliability of all
pages in that block. Instead, we model the variation in per-page RBER within a flash block as a
                                                a−1 e − x
gamma distribution (i.e., дamma(x, a, s) = x Γ(a)s      s
                                                       a ). In this model, x is the RBER; a is the shape

parameter, which controls how the RBER distribution is skewed; and s is the scale parameter, which
controls the width of the RBER distribution.
   Figure 11 shows the probability density for per-page RBER within a block that has endured 10K
P/E cycles. The bars show the measured per-page RBERs categorized into 50 bins, and the blue and
orange curves are the fitted gamma distributions whose parameters are shown on the legend. The
blue bars and curve represent the measured and fitted RBER distributions when the pages are read
using the variation-agnostic Vopt . To find the variation-agnostic Vopt , we use techniques designed
for planar NAND flash memory to learn a single optimal read reference voltage (Vopt ) for each flash
                                                                  Cause of Difference
    Attribute             Observation in 3D NAND                                                                 Future Trend
                                                                   in 3D vs. Planar
 Process Variation
                        Layer-to-layer process variation                                                 Process variation will increase
   (Section 4.2,                                              Vertical stacking of flash cells
                                  is significant                                                        as we stack more cells vertically
Appendix A.4, A.5)
                                                                                                       Early retention loss will continue
  Retention Loss              Early retention loss                   Charge trap cell
                                                                                                           if charge trap cell is used
(Sections 4.3, 4.4,
                                                                                                     Retention interference will increase
 Appendix A.2)               Retention interference           Vertical stacking of flash cells
                                                                                                 when smaller process technology node is used
                      Distribution parameters change with
  P/E Cycling                                                 Larger manufacturing process       P/E cycle trend will go back to power-law trend
                        P/E cycle count following a linear
(Appendix A.1.2)                                                    technology node              when smaller process technology node is used
                       trend instead of a power-law trend
                       Wordline-to-wordline interference
    Program                                                   Vertical stacking of flash cells        Will continue to exist in 3D NAND
                               along the z-axis
  Interference
(Appendix A.1.3)                                              Larger manufacturing process            Program interference will increase
                        40% lower program interference
                                                                    technology node              when smaller process technology node is used
 Vth Distribution            ER and P1 states have             Use of one-shot programming         Programming errors may start occurring
   (Section 4.1)            no programming errors            instead of two-step programming           if two-step programming is used
  Read Disturb                                                Larger manufacturing process             Read disturb effect will increase
                        96.7% smaller read disturb effect
(Appendix A.3.2)                                                    technology node              when smaller process technology node is used

                            Table 1. Summary of error characteristics of 3D NAND and planar NAND flash memory.
                                                                                                                                                   Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory
                                                                                                                                                   17
18                                                                                                             Y. Luo et al.

block, such that the chosen voltage minimizes the overall RBER across the entire block [64, 76]. The
orange bars and curve represent the measured and fitted RBER distributions when the pages are
read using the variation-aware Vopt , on a per-page basis. To find the variation-aware Vopt , we use
techniques that are described in Section 6.1 to efficiently learn an optimal read reference voltage
for each page in the block, such that we minimize the per-page RBER.

                               0.10
                                                      Avg = 1.4×10−4                Variation-agnostic Vopt
         Probability Density




                               0.08                                                 Variation-aware Vopt
                                                        Avg = 1.6×10−4
                                                                                    Fit = gamma(2.2, 7.4×10−5)
                               0.06
                                                                                    Fit = gamma(1.8, 8.1×10−5)
                               0.04
                                                                            MSB pages in middle layers
                               0.02

                               0.00
                                      0     1×10−4      2×10−4     3×10−4     4×10−4       5×10−4     6×10−4
                                                                    Per-Page RBER


                                          Fig. 11. RBER distribution across pages within a flash block.


   We make three observations from the figure. First, the gamma distribution fits well with the
measured probability density function of RBER variation across layers: the Kullback-Leibler di-
vergence error value [53] between the measured and fitted distributions is only 0.09. Second, the
average RBER reduces from 1.6 × 10−4 to 1.4 × 10−4 when we use the variation-aware Vopt . Third,
some flash pages have a much higher RBER than the average RBER (e.g., > 4 × 10−4 ) even when we
use the variation-aware Vopt . This large gap between the worst-case RBER and the average RBER
is caused by both layer-to-layer process variation and MSB–LSB RBER variation (see Figure 5 in
Section 4.2). The pages that have the highest RBER are MSB pages that reside in the middle layers.
This observation indicates that there is potential to significantly improve reliability by minimizing
the RBER variation across flash pages (for which we describe a mechanism in Section 6.2).

5.2 Retention Loss Model
We construct a model to describe the early retention loss phenomenon and its impact on RBER
(log(RBER)) and threshold voltage (V ) in 3D NAND flash memory, as a function of retention time
(t) and the P/E cycle count (PEC): log(RBER) = A · log(t) + B; V = A · log(t) + B. For both equations,
A = α · PEC + β and B = γ · PEC + δ , where α, β, γ , and δ are constants that change depending
on which variable we are solving for. We use ordinary least squares method implemented in
Statsmodel [88] to fit the model to our real characterization data described in Section 4.3. Recall
that this data is collected from 72 flash pages belonging to 11 randomly-selected flash blocks.
Following the experimental observations in Section 4.3 and in prior work [65, 69], we break down
our model into two parts. The first part (A) models the retention loss at a certain P/E cycle count
as a logarithmic function of retention time. The second part (B) models how the P/E cycle count
changes the parameters of retention loss.
   Table 2 shows all of the parameters we use to model the RBER and the threshold voltage as
a function of the retention time (t) and the P/E cycle count (PEC). In this table, the first column
shows the modeled variable for each row. The second to fifth columns show the parameters (i.e.,
α, β, γ , and δ ) fitted to our model. Note that the model for the optimal Va does not have α and
β parameters because Va is insensitive to retention time. The last column shows the adjusted
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                           19

coefficient of determination (adjusted R 2 ) of our model. We find that our model achieves high
adjusted R 2 values for all variables except for σ ER and Va , meaning that our model explains >89%
of the variation in the characterized data. The adjusted R 2 values are relatively small for σ ER and
Va because these two variables do not change much with the retention time or the P/E cycle count.
We conclude that our model is accurate and easy to compute (as it can be computed using simple
linear regression). Thus, our model is suitable to use online in the SSD controller (for which we
will describe a mechanism in Section 6.3).


                                               Model Parameters for:
            Variable                V ariable = (α · PEC + β) · log(t) + γ · PEC + δ      Adjusted R 2
                                         α              β              γ           δ
    MSB RBER     log(RBER M S B )    5.49 × 10−6       0.16      1.33 × 10−4    -13.11       97.17%
    LSB RBER      log(RBER LS B )    7.92 × 10−6       0.25      3.28 × 10−5    -12.72       90.05%
     ER Mean           µ ER          1.01 × 10−4       0.74      1.52 × 10−3    -27.27       96.86%
     P1 Mean           µP 1         -1.94 × 10−5      -0.40      3.51 × 10−4    114.47       95.88%
     P2 Mean           µP 2         -4.71 × 10−5      -0.70      3.23 × 10−4    189.58       98.50%
     P3 Mean           µP 3         -7.37 × 10−5      -1.20      5.75 × 10−4    264.85       98.29%
     ER Stdev          σ ER          1.20 × 10−5      -0.10      1.63 × 10−6    17.01        56.33%
     P1 Stdev          σP 1         -1.34 × 10−6   9.83 × 10−3   7.55 × 10−5    10.20        93.20%
     P2 Stdev          σP 2         -2.12 × 10−6   9.85 × 10−3   6.69 × 10−5    10.65        89.02%
     P3 Stdev          σP 3          2.87 × 10−6   1.40 × 10−2   3.30 × 10−5    10.83        93.00%
    Optimal Va         Va                 —             —        1.20 × 10−3    60.52        71.20%
    Optimal Vb         Vb           -3.72 × 10−5      -0.57      4.20 × 10−4    150.56       94.27%
    Optimal Vc          Vc          -6.51 × 10−5      -1.06      4.81 × 10−4    227.24       97.72%
Table 2. Retention loss model for 3D NAND flash memory and its model parameters. PEC is P/E cycle lifetime,
t is retention time.




6     3D NAND ERROR MITIGATION TECHNIQUES
Motivated by our new findings in Section 4, we aim to design new techniques that mitigate the
three unique error effects (i.e., layer-to-layer process variation, early retention loss, and retention
interference) in 3D NAND flash memory. We propose four error mitigation mechanisms. To mitigate
layer-to-layer process variation, we propose LaVAR and LI-RAID. LaVAR learns our new RBER
variation model (see Section 5.1) online in the SSD controller, and uses this model to predict
and apply an optimal read reference voltage that is fine-tuned to each layer (Section 6.1). LI-
RAID is a new RAID scheme that reduces the RBER variation induced by layer-to-layer process
variation in 3D NAND flash memory (Section 6.2). To mitigate retention loss in 3D NAND flash
memory, we propose ReMAR, a new technique that tracks the retention time information within
the SSD controller and uses our new retention loss model (see Section 5.2) to predict and apply the
optimal read reference voltage that is fine-tuned to the retention time of the data (Section 6.3). To
mitigate retention interference, we propose ReNAC, which is adapted from neighbor-cell assisted
correction (NAC) [16], an existing technique originally designed to reduce program interference in
planar NAND flash memory, to also account for retention interference in 3D NAND flash memory
(Section 6.4).
20                                                                                         Y. Luo et al.

6.1   LaVAR: Layer Variation Aware Reading
In planar NAND flash memory, existing techniques assume that the RBER is the same across all
pages within a flash memory block, and, thus, a single Vopt value can be used for all pages in the
block [6, 76]. This approach is called variation-agnostic Vopt . However, as our results in Section 4.2
show, this assumption no longer holds in 3D NAND flash memory due to layer-to-layer process
variation, as each page in a block resides in a different layer. We aim to improve flash memory
lifetime by mitigating layer-to-layer process variation and reducing the RBER. The key idea is to
identify how much the read reference voltage must be offset by for each layer in a flash chip, to
account for the layer-to-layer process variation, instead of using a single read reference voltage
for the entire block irrespective of layers. When the SSD controller performs a read request, it
accounts for (1) per-block variation in RBER, by predicting a variation-agnostic Vopt based on the
P/E cycle count of the flash block; and (2) layer-to-layer variation, by adding the layer-specific
offset to the variation-agnostic Vopt for the target block. This generates a variation-aware Vopt that
the controller uses as the read reference voltage.
   Mechanism. We devise a new mechanism called Layer Variation Aware Reading (LaVAR), which
(1) learns the voltage offsets for each layer and records them in per-chip tables in the SSD controller,
and (2) uses the variation-aware Vopt during a read operation by reading the appropriate voltage
offset for the request from the per-chip table that corresponds to the layer of the request. LaVAR
constructs a model of the optimal read reference voltage (Vopt ) variation across different layers.
Since there are only a limited number of layers, this model can be represented as a table (i.e., it
is a non-parametric model) of the offset between the Vopt for each layer (variation-aware Vopt )
and the overall Vopt for the entire flash block (variation-agnostic Vopt ). Any previously-proposed
model for Vopt [6, 64, 76] can be used to calculate the variation-agnostic Vopt . Since the layer-
to-layer process variation is similar across blocks and is consistent across P/E cycle counts, the
Vopt variation model can be learned offline for each chip through an extensive characterization
of a single flash block. To do this, the SSD controller randomly picks a flash block and records
the difference between the variation-aware Vopt and the variation-agnostic Vopt . LaVAR uses the
existing read-retry functionality in modern NAND flash memory chips (see Section 4.1) to find
the variation-aware Vopt online. The controller then computes and stores the average Vopt offset
for each layer in a lookup table stored for each chip. Note that Vc variation does not need to be
modeled, since Vc is unaffected by layer-to-layer process variation (see Figure 6 in Section 4.2).
   When performing a read operation, the SSD controller simply looks up the Vopt offset that
corresponds to the layer and the chip that contains the data being read, and adds the offset to the
per-block Vopt predicted by existing techniques [6, 64, 76]. By using variation-aware Vopt , LaVAR
enables the use of a more accurate Vopt for 3D NAND flash memory than existing techniques, and
thus reduces the RBER (see Figure 11 in Section 5.1).
   Overhead. LaVAR can be implemented fully in the SSD controller firmware, and, thus, does not
require any modification to the hardware. Assuming that the 3D NAND flash memory chip has
N layers and that it takes 1 Byte to store each Vopt offset for each layer, the memory overhead of
storing the lookup table for Va and Vb in the SSD controller is 2N Bytes. The latency overhead of
each read operation is negligible as LaVAR requires only a table lookup and an addition to obtain
variation-aware Vopt , which take less than 100 ns. Since the lookup table is shared across all blocks
in a chip, it needs to be learned only once, and it can be constructed gradually in the background.
Thus, the performance overhead of LaVAR is negligible.
   Evaluation. Figure 12 compares the RBER obtained by using LaVAR (variation-aware Vopt ) [6, 64,
76] to that obtained by using an existing read reference voltage tuning technique (variation-agnostic
Vopt ) designed for planar NAND flash memory. We evaluate the average RBER obtained by each
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                        21

mechanism by simulating read operations using our characterization data in Section 4.2. Averaged
across all P/E cycle counts, LaVAR reduces the RBER by 43.3%. The benefit comes from tuning
the read reference voltage towards the variation-aware Vopt by an offset learned by our model.
The RBER reduction becomes smaller as the P/E cycle count increases, because the overall RBER
increases exponentially as the NAND flash memory wears out, decreasing the fraction of process
variation errors. While the flash lifetime improvements produced by LaVAR might seem small (as
we show in Section 6.5), (1) they are achieved with negligible overhead, and (2) the RBER reduction
enabled by LaVAR throughout the flash memory lifetime reduces the average flash read latency [6].
As the number of layers within a 3D NAND flash memory chip grows (e.g., vendors are already
bringing chips with 96 layers to the market [1]), we expect that layer-to-layer process variation
will increase, which in turn will increase the magnitude of the lifetime benefits provided by LaVAR.


                                   10− 3       Baseline (Variation-agnostic Vopt)
                                               LaVAR (Variation-aware Vopt)
                    Average RBER




                                   10− 4




                                   10− 5
                                           0     2     4       6      8     10    12   14   16
                                                           P/E Cycle Count (×103)


                                               Fig. 12. RBER reduction using LaVAR.


6.2   LI-RAID: Layer-Interleaved RAID
As we observe in Section 5.1, even after applying the variation-aware Vopt , the per-page RBER is
distributed over a wide range according to a fitted gamma distribution due to layer-to-layer process
variation and MSB–LSB RBER variation (see Figure 5 in Section 4.2). In enterprise SSDs, in addition
to ECC, the Redundant Array of Independent Disks (RAID) [2, 83] error recovery technique is
used across multiple flash chips to tolerate chip-to-chip process variation in error rates. RAID in
modern SSDs typically combines one flash page from each flash chip into a logical unit called a
RAID group, and uses one of the pages to store the parity information for the entire group. However,
state-of-the-art RAID schemes do not consider layer-to-layer process variation and MSB–LSB RBER
variation. These schemes group MSB or LSB pages in the same layer together in a RAID group. As a
result, the reliability of the SSD is limited by the RBER of the weakest (i.e., the least reliable) RAID
group that contains the MSB or LSB pages from the least reliable layer across all chips. We devise a
new RAID scheme called Layer-Interleaved RAID (LI-RAID), which eliminates these low-reliability
RAID groups by equalizing the RBER among different RAID groups. LI-RAID makes use of two key
ideas: (1) group flash pages in less reliable layers with pages in more reliable layers, and (2) group
MSB pages with LSB pages.
   Mechanism. Instead of grouping pages in the same layer together in the same RAID group,
we select pages from different chips and different layers and group them together, such that the
low-reliability pages (either due to layer-to-layer process variation or MSB–LSB RBER variation)
are distributed to different RAID groups. Thus, the new groups formed by LI-RAID have a more
evenly-distributed RBER than the groups formed using traditional layer-unaware RAID schemes.
We assume, without loss of generality, that there are m chips in the SSD, and each RAID group
22                                                                                            Y. Luo et al.

contains m pages, one from each chip. We also assume that each block contains n wordlines, and
that the layer numbers of each wordline are in ascending order (e.g., the wordline in layer i has a
lower wordline number than its neighboring wordline in layer i + 1). Thus, LI-RAID groups together
                                                         n                                n
the MSB page of wordline 0, the LSB page of wordline m     , the MSB page of wordline 2 · m , the LSB
                                                n                                       n
page . . . , the MSB page of wordline (m − 2) · m , the LSB page of wordline (m − 1) · m . Figure 13
shows an example LI-RAID layout on an SSD with 4 chips and with 4 wordlines within each flash
block. Flash pages in the same RAID group are highlighted in the same color. In this way, LI-RAID
distributes the less reliable pages within each chip across different RAID groups, thereby avoiding
the formation of significantly less reliable RAID groups that bottleneck SSD reliability.


             Wordline #      Layer #     Page     Chip 0     Chip 1      Chip 2     Chip 3
                   0             0       MSB     Group 0      Blank     Group 4     Group 3
                   0             0       LSB     Group 1      Blank     Group 5     Group 2
                   1             1       MSB     Group 2     Group 1     Blank      Group 5
                   1             1       LSB     Group 3     Group 0     Blank      Group 4
                   2             2       MSB     Group 4     Group 3    Group 0      Blank
                   2             2       LSB     Group 5     Group 2    Group 1      Blank
                   3             3       MSB      Blank      Group 5    Group 2     Group 1
                   3             3       LSB      Blank      Group 4    Group 3     Group 0

     Fig. 13. LI-RAID layout example for an SSD with 4 chips and with 4 wordlines in each flash block.


   Note that, since the order of RAID group number is different in each flash chip, the LI-RAID
layout may potentially violate the program sequence recommended by flash vendors, where
wordlines within each flash block must be programmed in order to minimize harmful program
interference [9, 15, 16, 77]. For example, in Chip 2 in Figure 13, Wordline 3 (Groups 2 and 3) is
programmed after Wordline 2 (Groups 0 and 1). In Chip 2, we leave Wordline 1 blank (marked
as“Blank” in Figure 13). Otherwise, Wordline 1 would cause program interference to the data in
Wordline 2, which already experiences program interference when Wordline 3 is programmed,
significantly increasing the error rate of Wordline 1 [15, 16] (see Appendix A.1.3). By laying out the
data in the proposed manner, LI-RAID provides the same reliability guarantee as the recommended
program sequence, by guaranteeing that any data stored in a flash page experiences program
interference from at most one neighboring wordline.
   Overhead. The grouping of flash pages by LI-RAID is implemented entirely in the SSD controller
firmware. This requires the firmware to be aware of the physical-page-to-layer mapping. The flash
pages left blank in LI-RAID incur a small additional storage overhead compared to a conventional
RAID scheme. Only one wordline (i.e., two pages in MLC NAND flash memory) within a flash
block is left blank, to mitigate the impact of program interference on Groups 0 and 1. Without
this blank wordline, the data in Groups 0 and 1 would be the only data to experience program
interference twice: once when Groups 2 and 3 are programmed, and once when the last two groups
are programmed. In modern NAND flash memory, each flash block typically contains at least 256
flash pages. Thus, the additional storage overhead for the blank pages is less than 0.8%. LI-RAID
does not incur additional computational overhead because it computes parity in the same way as
a conventional RAID scheme, and only reorganizes the RAID groups differently. Because we do
not change the data layout across flash blocks, the flash translation layer (FTL) and the garbage
collection (GC) algorithms remain the same as in a conventional RAID scheme.
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                      23

   Evaluation. Figure 14 plots the worst-case RBER (i.e., the highest per-page RBER within a flash
block) when we use different error mitigation techniques at 10,000 P/E cycles. Recall that the
per-page RBER within a flash block follows a gamma distribution (see Figure 11 in Section 5.1).
Thus, several least-reliable flash pages within a block may become unusable (i.e., their RBER exceeds
the ECC correction capability) before the overall RBER of the flash chip exceeds the ECC correction
capability. We use the worst-case RBER to represent the reliability of these least-reliable flash
pages. In this figure, the baseline uses the per-block variation-agnostic optimal read reference
voltage (i.e., variation-agnostic Vopt ), achieving a worst-case RBER of 4.8 · 10−4 . When we use the
variation-aware Vopt proposed in Section 6.1, the worst-case RBER is reduced by 9.6% over the
baseline, to 4.3 · 10−4 . LI-RAID reduces the worst-case RBER by 66.9% over the baseline, to only
1.6 · 10−4 . Thus, by grouping flash pages on less reliable layers with pages on more reliable layers,
and by grouping MSB pages with LSB pages, LI-RAID reduces the probability of unusable pages
within a block, thereby reducing the number of retired flash blocks due to ECC failures.

                Baseline (Variation-agnostic Vopt)
                    LaVAR (Variation-aware Vopt)
                                   LaVAR+LI-RAID
                                                     0   0.0001 0.0002 0.0003 0.0004 0.0005
                                                               Worst-Case RBER

             Fig. 14. Effect of LaVAR and LI-RAID on worst-case RBER at 10,000 P/E cycles.

   Note that LaVAR and LI-RAID do not rely on whether the RBER variation is consistent across all
chips. LaVAR learns a different lookup table for each chip. So, even if there is some chip-to-chip
process variation that is present, our models are effective at dynamically capturing the behavior of
any NAND flash memory chips. Conventional RAID tolerates only chip-to-chip process variation.
LI-RAID improves flash reliability over conventional RAID by eliminating the strong correlation
between RBER and layer number, which we show in Figure 5. We conclude that both LaVAR and
LI-RAID are effective at reducing the impact of layer-to-layer variation on the RBER.

6.3   ReMAR: Retention Model Aware Reading
As we show in Section 4.3, due to early retention loss, retention errors increase much faster after
programming a page in 3D NAND flash memory than they do in planar NAND flash memory.
Thus, mitigating retention errors has become more important in 3D NAND than in planar NAND
flash memory, as the errors have a greater impact on SSD reliability. However, as we show in our
model in Section 5.2, the RBER impact of early retention loss is proportional to the logarithm of
retention time. This means that a large majority of the retention errors and threshold voltage shifts
happen shortly after programming. As a result, traditional retention error mitigation techniques
developed for planar NAND flash memory, which are optimized for much larger retention times,
may become less effective on 3D NAND flash memory. For example, Flash Correct-and-Refresh
(FCR) [7, 8], a mechanism that remaps all data periodically, allows planar NAND to tolerate 50×
more P/E cycles with a 3-day refresh period. However, according to our evaluations, the P/E cycle
lifetime improvement of FCR reduces to only 2.7× for 3D NAND flash memory due to the early
retention loss phenomenon. This motivates us to explore new ways to mitigate retention errors in
3D NAND flash memory.
   Mechanism. We propose a new mechanism called Retention Model Aware Reading (ReMAR),
whose key idea is to accurately track the retention time of the data and apply the optimal read
reference voltage predicted by our model in Section 5.2. First, ReMAR constructs the same linear
24                                                                                                      Y. Luo et al.

models proposed in Section 5.2 online to accurately predict the optimal Va , Vb , and Vc . Similar
to the distribution parameter model used in Section 5.2, we model the optimal Vb and Vc as:
V = (α · PEC + β) · log(t) + γ · PEC + δ . We model the optimal Va as: Va = γ · PEC + δ , since Va
is not affected by retention time (as we show empirically in Section 4.3). To construct this model
online, the controller randomly selects a flash block and records the optimal read reference voltage
of the block (which the controller learns by sweeping the read reference voltages, as done in prior
work [6]), along with the block’s P/E cycle count (PEC) and retention time (t). Over time, these data
samples would cover a range of P/E cycle counts and retention times.8 Note that as the P/E cycle
count of the SSD increases, the accuracy of the model increases, because more data samples are
collected. Once this online model is constructed, it is used in the controller to predict the optimal
read reference voltage to be used for each read operation. To do this, the SSD controller stores
the P/E cycle count and the program time of each block as metadata. During each read operation,
the controller computes the retention time for each read by subtracting the program time from
the read time. Using the recorded P/E cycle count and the computed retention time of the data,
ReMAR applies the online model to predict Va , Vb , and Vc . By accurately predicting and applying
the optimal read reference voltages, ReMAR increases the accuracy of read operations and thereby
decreases the raw bit error rate.
   Overhead. Like LaVAR, ReMAR is implemented fully in the SSD controller firmware, and does
not require any modifications to the hardware. Assuming that the flash block size is 5 MB, and
that ReMAR stores the program time in the UNIX Epoch time format [67], which takes up 4 B, the
memory and storage overhead of ReMAR is 800KB for a 1TB SSD. The performance overhead of
each read operation is small, as ReMAR needs only a few dozen CPU cycles (on the order of 100 ns in
total) in the SSD controller to compute Vopt , which is negligible compared to flash read latency (on
the order of 10 µs). The performance overhead of learning the model can be hidden by (1) performing
learning in the background and (2) deprioritizing the requests issued for characterization purposes.
   The controller uses the UNIX Epoch time format [67] for program and read times, such that the
recorded time is valid after reboot. To do this, the controller needs a real-time clock to keep track
of the current time. Without a power source on the SSD, the controller needs a special command to
synchronize the current time with the host when it boots up. The program time of each block is
stored in the memory of the controller, along with other metadata that already exists such as the
logical address map and the P/E cycle count of each block.
   Evaluation. Figure 15 compares the RBER achieved by ReMAR to that of the state-of-the-art
read reference voltage tuning technique [64] designed for planar NAND flash memory (Baseline).
The results are based on the characterization data in Section 4.3. We assume that the average
retention time of the data is 24 days. The Baseline technique is unaware of the retention time. Thus,
Baseline uses a retention-agnostic Vopt based on only the P/E cycle count of the flash page. ReMAR
uses a retention-aware Vopt based on both the P/E cycle count and the retention time of the flash
page. On average across all P/E cycle counts, ReMAR reduces the RBER by 51.9%. As the P/E cycle
count increases, the benefit of ReMAR (i.e., the RBER improvement of ReMAR over Baseline) also
increases. We conclude that, by accurately tracking retention time, and by using our retention loss
model, ReMAR accurately adapts the read reference voltage to the threshold voltage shifts that
occur due to retention loss, and hence it effectively reduces the RBER.

6.4    ReNAC: Retention Interference Aware Neighbor-Cell Assisted Correction
As we observe in Section 4.4, due to retention interference, the amount of threshold voltage shift
of a victim cell during a certain amount of retention time is affected by the value stored in a
8 The SSD controller can also perform additional characterization if a certain data range is missing.
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                        25


                                   10− 2
                                                Baseline (Retention-agnostic Vopt)
                                                ReMAR (Retention-aware Vopt)
                    Average RBER   10− 3



                                   10− 4



                                   10− 5
                                           0         2          4          6         8   10
                                                           P/E Cycle Count (×103)


                                               Fig. 15. RBER reduction using ReMAR.


vertically-adjacent neighbor cell. This phenomenon presents a similar data dependency as that
induced by program interference, where the amount of the threshold voltage shift of a victim
cell during programming operation also depends on the value stored in the directly-neighboring
cells [15, 16]. To mitigate program interference errors, prior work proposes neighbor-cell assisted
correction (NAC) [16]. The goal of NAC is to reduce the raw bit error rate by reading each cell at
the read reference voltage optimized for the amount of program interference induced by its directly-
neighboring cells. To achieve this goal, after error correction fails on a flash page, NAC reads the
data stored in the neighboring wordline and re-reads the failed page using a set of read reference
voltage values that are adjusted based on the data values stored in the directly-neighboring cells [16].
However, this mechanism does not account for retention interference induced by the neighboring
cells, which is new in 3D NAND flash memory. We adapt NAC for 3D NAND flash memory to
account for the new retention interference phenomenon, and call this adapted mechanism Retention
Interference Aware Neighbor-Cell Assisted Correction (ReNAC).
   Mechanism. The key idea of ReNAC is to use the data stored in a vertically-adjacent neighbor
cell to predict the amount of retention interference on a victim cell. Using similar techniques from
Section 5.2, ReNAC first develops an online model of retention interference as a function of the
retention time and the neighbor cell’s state. The SSD controller obtains the retention time of each
block using a mechanism similar to ReMAR, and computes and applies the neighbor-cell-dependent
read offset at that retention time from the model. For ReNAC, we are currently unable to show any
meaningful improvements in flash lifetime for the current generation of 3D NAND flash memory,
because retention interference shifts the threshold voltage by only less than two voltage steps
(Figure 10), which is much smaller than the voltage changes due to process variation (Figure 6)
and early retention loss (Figure 8). However, we expect that retention interference will increase
in future 3D NAND flash memory devices due to decreasing cell sizes and decreasing distances
between neighboring cells (Table 1), which, in turn, will likely increase the benefit of using ReNAC.
We also expect ReNAC to have a relatively larger benefit in 3D NAND flash memory chips that
use triple-level cell (TLC) or quadruple-level cell (QLC) technologies. A TLC or QLC NAND flash
memory chip stores more bits in a cell than an MLC NAND flash memory chip, by splitting up
the same voltage range into a greater number of states (eight for TLC and sixteen for QLC). Doing
so reduces the voltage margin between neighboring threshold voltage distributions. Therefore,
shifting the read reference voltage by two voltage steps may affect more cells in TLC and QLC 3D
NAND flash memory than in MLC 3D NAND flash memory, and, thus, ReNAC can reduce a greater
number of raw bit errors in future TLC or QLC NAND flash memory. We leave a quantitative
evaluation of ReNAC on future 3D NAND flash memory chips to future work.
26                                                                                                          Y. Luo et al.

6.5     Putting It All Together: Effect on System Reliability and Performance
The mechanisms we propose in this section can be combined together to achieve significant
reductions in average and worst-case RBER. For a consumer-class 3D NAND flash memory device,
these reductions improve flash memory lifetime, i.e., the device can tolerate more P/E cycles before
failing. For an enterprise-class device which is expected to be replaced after a fixed amount of
time, these reductions improve the sustainable workload write intensity or reduce the ECC storage
overhead. We evaluate these potential effects of our mechanisms on storage system reliability and
performance.
   Flash Lifetime (or Performance) Improvement. In Figure 16, we compare and contrast the
reliability (i.e., the RBER) of five example SSDs: (1) Baseline, an SSD that uses a fixed, default read
reference voltage and employs a conventional RAID scheme; (2) State-of-the-art, an SSD that uses
the optimal read reference voltage predicted by existing mechanisms designed for planar NAND
flash memory [6, 64, 76, 81] and employs a conventional RAID scheme; (3) LaVAR, an SSD that uses
the optimal read reference voltage for each layer predicted by LaVAR in addition to State-of-the-art;
(4) LaVAR+LI-RAID, an SSD that uses the LI-RAID scheme in addition to LaVAR; and (5) This Work
(LaVAR + LI-RAID + ReMAR), an SSD that uses the optimal read reference voltage predicted by
LaVAR and ReMAR, and also employs the LI-RAID scheme. In this figure, we plot the worst-case
RBER (i.e., the highest per-page RBER within a flash block) instead of the average RBER, because
the worst-case RBER limits the flash memory lifetime. Because RBER increases with P/E cycle
count, if the worst-case RAID group has a high enough worst-case RBER, NAND flash memory can
no longer guarantee reliable operation.

                                    Baseline             State-of-the-art          LaVAR
                                    LaVAR + LI-RAID      This Work
                                 10-2
                              1.0E-2
                   Worst-Case RBER




                                       ECC Limit
                                 10-3
                              1.0E-3
                                 10-4
                              1.0E-4
                                 10-5
                              1.0E-5
                                        0      5           10       15               20           25
                                                      P/E Cycle Count (×103)

      Fig. 16. Effect of LaVAR, LI-RAID, and ReMAR on worst-case RBER experienced by any flash block.


    Assuming that the ECC deployed on the SSD can correct errors up to an RBER of 3 · 10−3 [6, 9]
(i.e., the ECC limit, shown as a purple dashed line in Figure 16), we can calculate the lifetime of
each SSD we evaluate.9 In our evaluations, the flash memory lifetime ends when the worst-case
RBER exceeds the ECC limit. We find that State-of-the-art, LaVAR, LaVAR+LI-RAID, and This Work
improve flash memory lifetime by 23.8%, 25.3%, 57.2%, and 85.0%, respectively, over the Baseline.
When the SSD is used in a server, which has a fixed device lifetime, the server has to throttle
9 Note that we are unable to directly measure the flash lifetime improvements on real devices, because manufacturers do not

provide us with the ability to modify the SSD firmware directly, which prevents us from evaluating our techniques on the
real devices themselves. Unfortunately, we also do not have the resources to measure the lifetime of a large number of real
flash chips by emulating the behavior of our mechanisms, as this would require many additional months to years of effort.
Instead, we follow the precedent of prior work to evaluate the flash memory lifetime based on real RBER characterization
data we obtain from the testing of real flash memory devices.
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                         27

the write frequency to a certain drive writes per day (DWPD) to ensure that the SSD can operate
reliably during the fixed lifetime. In this case, our combined mechanisms (This Work) increase the
maximum write frequency (i.e., the maximum DWPD) of the SSDs in a server by 85.0%. Thus, our
mechanisms either improve lifetime or improve performance under a fixed lifetime.
   ECC Storage Overhead Reduction. In modern SSDs, the storage overhead for error correction
increases in each generation to better tolerate the degraded flash reliability due to aggressive
scaling. For example, to tolerate an RBER of up to 3 · 10−3 for the Baseline SSD at the end of
its lifetime, a modern BCH code [36] requires 12.8% storage overhead for the redundant ECC
bits [25] (i.e., ECC redundancy). By deploying all of our proposed error mitigation techniques in
an enterprise-class SSD, the RBER at the end of the fixed flash memory lifetime is significantly
lower compared to Baseline. Thus, we can redesign the ECC deployed in the SSD to tolerate only
up to the reduced RBER, which requires fewer ECC bits and, thus, lower ECC redundancy than the
ECC required for the Baseline. Assuming all five of the evaluated SSDs achieve the same lifetime,
and the same reliability (i.e., uncorrectable error rate) at the end of their lifetime, State-of-the-art,
LaVAR, LaVAR+LI-RAID, and This Work reduce ECC redundancy by 42.2%, 45.3%, 68.8%, and 78.9%,
respectively, over Baseline. We leave the evaluation of the performance improvements due to a
weaker ECC requirement [22, 59] for future work.
   We conclude that by combining LaVAR, LI-RAID, and ReMAR, we can (1) achieve significant
improvements in the lifetime of 3D NAND flash memory, (2) enable higher write intensity in
workloads within a given lifetime requirement, or (3) keep the lifetime constant but greatly reduce
the storage cost of reliability in 3D NAND flash memory.

7   RELATED WORK
To our knowledge, this paper is the first in open literature to (1) show the differences between the
error characteristics of 3D NAND flash memory and that of planar NAND flash memory through
extensive characterization using real 3D NAND flash memory chips, (2) develop models of layer-to-
layer process variation and early retention loss for 3D NAND flash memory, and (3) propose and
show the benefits of four new mechanisms based on the new error characteristics of 3D NAND
flash memory. Due to the importance of NAND flash memory reliability in storage systems, there
is a large body of related work. We treat this related work in five different categories.
   3D NAND Flash Memory Error Characterization. Two recent works compare the retention
loss phenomenon between 3D NAND and planar NAND flash memory [65, 70] through real
device characterization, and report findings similar to our work regarding the early retention
loss phenomenon. Two other recent works use a methodology similar to ours to characterize 3D
NAND devices based on different 3D NAND flash memory cell technologies (i.e., 3D floating-gate
cell and 3D vertical gate cell) [38, 94, 95], which are less common than the 3D charge trap NAND
flash memory cell technology that we test in this paper. Other recent works [23, 31, 78, 80, 92]
report several differences of 3D NAND flash memory from planar NAND flash memory. These
differences include (1) smaller program variation at high P/E cycle counts [80], (2) smaller program
interference [80], (3) layer-to-layer process variation [92], (4) early retention loss [23, 31, 78],
and (5) retention interference [23]. While prior works have reported on the existence of these
errors, none of them provide a comprehensive characterization of all of the different errors using
the same chips. Only one of these prior works [23] provides a detailed analysis based on circuit-
level measurements and characterizations, and does so only for early retention loss and retention
interference. Other works provide only a high-level summary of real device characterization [80]
or do not provide any real device characterization results at all [31, 78, 92]. Our work performs an
extensive detailed analysis of all known sources of error in 3D NAND flash memory chips, which
allows us to understand the relative impact of each error source on the same chip. We report the
28                                                                                          Y. Luo et al.

first set of extensive results on three error characteristics that are new in 3D NAND flash memory:
layer-to-layer process variation, early retention loss, and retention interference.
   Planar NAND Flash Memory Error Characterization. A large body of prior work studies
all types of error sources on planar NAND flash memory, including P/E cycling errors [9, 14, 64,
81], programming errors [4, 64, 81], cell-to-cell program interference errors [15, 16], retention
errors [6, 7, 9, 28], and read disturb errors [5, 9]. These works characterize how the raw bit error
rate and threshold voltage change due to various types of error sources. A detailed survey of such
prior works on planar NAND flash memory can be found in our recent survey articles [9, 11]. Our
paper experimentally studies all of these error mechanisms in the new 3D NAND flash memory
context, and compares 3D NAND flash memory error characteristics with results in these prior
works to show the differences between 3D NAND and planar NAND flash memory. Prior work
demonstrates the early retention loss phenomenon in planar NAND flash memory based on charge
trap transistors [21], which is similar to, but not as severe as, the early retention loss phenomenon
in 3D NAND flash memory. We investigate retention interference and process variation related
errors, in addition to these other error types discovered before in planar NAND flash memory.
   Planar NAND Error Modeling and Mitigation. Based on characterization results, prior work
proposes models for planar NAND flash memory threshold voltage distribution, and models for
estimating the effect of P/E cycling on the threshold voltage distribution [14, 64, 81]. Our work
uses a simpler threshold voltage distribution model, since more complex models are designed to
handle programming errors in planar NAND flash memory that do not exist in the 3D NAND
flash memory chips that we test. We develop a unified model of retention loss and wearout for
the RBER, threshold voltage distribution, and Vopt in 3D NAND flash memory. There is a large
body of prior work that proposes mechanisms to mitigate planar NAND flash memory errors [4–
9, 11, 15, 16, 32, 33, 37, 40, 41, 60, 63, 64, 74, 75, 93, 98]. In Section 6, we have already compared our
mechanisms to several of these techniques that are state-of-the-art, and have shown that prior
techniques developed for planar NAND flash memory are less effective in 3D NAND flash memory
than our techniques due to the new error characteristics of 3D NAND flash memory.
   3D NAND Flash Memory Error Mitigation. Prior work proposes circuit-level and system-
level techniques to tolerate layer-to-layer process variation in 3D NAND flash memory. Two recent
works propose to use different read reference voltages for different layers [38, 96], which is similar
to the LaVAR technique that we propose in Section 6.1. Unlike our work, these prior works do
not (1) design a detailed mechanism like LaVAR to learn and use the Vopt in a lookup table, or
(2) evaluate their techniques using real characterization data. Wang et al. propose to apply different
read reference voltages for less-reliable pages storing critical metadata [92]. As we have shown in
Section 6.1, while these prior techniques improve average RBER, they do not significantly reduce
worst-case RBER, which limits the flash memory lifetime. In this work, we propose a series of
mitigation techniques that not only significantly reduce the average and worst-case RBER but also
tolerate other new error characteristics we find in 3D NAND flash memory, such as early retention
loss and retention interference.
   Large-Scale SSD Error Characterization. Prior work performs large-scale studies of errors
found in flash memories deployed in data centers [68, 72, 87]. Since the operating system is unaware
of the raw bit errors in the NAND flash memory devices, these studies can only use drive-level
statistics provided by the SSD controller, such as overall RBER and uncorrectable error rate, average
P/E cycle count, and a coarse estimation of retention time and read disturb counts. In contrast,
in our studies, we have complete access to the physical location, P/E cycle count, retention time,
and read disturb count of each read/write operation, and thus can provide deeper insights and
controlled experimental results compared to large-scale studies, which have to be correlational in
nature.
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                                          29

   DRAM Error Characterization. Like a flash memory cell, a DRAM cell stores charge to repre-
sent a piece of data. Hence, DRAM has many error characteristics that are similar to NAND flash
memory. For example, charge leaks from a DRAM cell over time, at a speed much faster than that
for NAND flash memory (i.e., on the order of milliseconds to seconds in DRAM [61, 62]), leading to
data retention errors. This phenomenon in DRAM is analogous to the retention loss phenomenon in
NAND flash memory (see Section 4.3 and Appendix A.2), and its effect has been studied through
extensive experimental characterization of DRAM chips [34, 35, 44, 46–49, 51, 56, 61, 82, 85]. Similar
to the retention interference phenomenon found in 3D NAND flash memory (see Section 4.4),
DRAM exhibits data-dependent retention behavior, or data pattern dependence (DPD) [61], where
the retention time of a DRAM cell is dependent on the values written to nearby DRAM cells [46–
49, 61, 82]. Conceptually similar to the read disturb errors found in NAND flash memory (see
Appendix A.3.2), commodity DRAM chips that are sold and used in the field today exhibit read
disturb errors [52], also called RowHammer-induced errors [71]. These errors are affected by process
variation, which we comprehensively examine in 3D NAND flash memory (see Section 4.2 and
Appendix A.4). Process variation in DRAM is shown to also affect access latency, retention time,
and power consumption [17–20, 30, 34, 35, 43, 44, 46–49, 51, 54–56, 61, 62, 66, 82, 85].

8   CONCLUSION
We develop a new understanding of three new error characteristics in 3D NAND flash memory
through rigorous experimental characterization of real, state-of-the-art 3D NAND flash memory
chips: layer-to-layer process variation, early retention loss, and retention interference. We analyze
and show that these new error characteristics are fundamentally caused by changes introduced in
the 3D NAND flash memory architecture compared to the planar NAND flash memory architecture.
To handle these three new error characteristics in 3D NAND flash memory, we develop new
analytical models for layer-to-layer process variation and early retention loss in 3D NAND flash
memory. Our models can accurately predict/estimate the optimal read reference voltage and the
raw bit error rate based on the retention time and the layer number of each flash memory page.
We propose four new error mitigation techniques that utilize our new models to improve the
reliability of 3D NAND flash memory. Our evaluations show that our newly-proposed techniques
successfully mitigate the new error patterns that we discover in 3D NAND flash memory. We hope
that the rigorous and comprehensive error characterization and analyses performed in this work
motivate future rigorous studies on 3D NAND flash memory reliability, and that they inspire new
error mitigation mechanisms that cater to the new error characteristics found in 3D NAND flash
memory.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank our shepherd, Benny Van Houdt, the anonymous reviewers, and SAFARI members for
their feedback. This work is partially supported by grants from Huawei and Seagate, and gifts from
Huawei, Intel, Microsoft, and Samsung.

REFERENCES
 [1] AnandTech, “Western Digital Announce BiCS4 3D NAND: 96 Layers, TLC & QLC, Up to 1 Tb per Chip,” https:
     //www.anandtech.com/show/11585/western-digital-announce-bics4-96-layer-nand, 2017.
 [2] M. Balakrishnan, A. Kadav, V. Prabhakaran, and D. Malkhi, “Differential RAID: Rethinking RAID for SSD Reliability,”
     TOS, 2010.
 [3] R. Bez, E. Camerlenghi, A. Modelli, and A. Visconti, “Introduction to Flash Memory,” Proc. IEEE, 2003.
 [4] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, Y. Luo, K. Mai, O. Mutlu, and E. F. Haratsch, “Vulnerabilities in MLC NAND Flash Memory Programming:
     Experimental Analysis, Exploits, and Mitigation Techniques,” in HPCA, 2017.
30                                                                                                               Y. Luo et al.

 [5] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, K. Mai, and O. Mutlu, “Read Disturb Errors in MLC NAND Flash Memory:
     Characterization and Mitigation,” in DSN, 2015.
 [6] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, E. F. Haratsch, K. Mai, and O. Mutlu, “Data Retention in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Characterization,
     Optimization, and Recovery,” in HPCA, 2015.
 [7] Y. Cai, G. Yalcin, O. Mutlu, E. F. Haratsch, A. Cristal, O. Unsal, and K. Mai, “Flash Correct and Refresh: Retention Aware
     Management for Increased Lifetime,” in ICCD, 2012.
 [8] Y. Cai, G. Yalcin, O. Mutlu, E. F. Haratsch, A. Cristal, O. Unsal, and K. Mai, “Error Analysis and Retention-Aware Error
     Management for NAND Flash Memory,” Intel Technology J., 2013.
 [9] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error Characterization, Mitigation, and Recovery in Flash-
     Memory-Based Solid-State Drives,” Proc. IEEE, 2017.
[10] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Errors in Flash-Memory-Based Solid-State Drives: Analysis,
     Mitigation, and Recovery,” arxiv:1711.11427 [cs.AR], 2017.
[11] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Reliability Issues in Flash-Memory-Based Solid-State Drives:
     Experimental Analysis, Mitigation, Recovery,” in Inside Solid State Drives (SSDs), 2nd ed. Springer Nature, 2018.
[12] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, M. McCartney, and K. Mai, “FPGA-Based Solid-State Drive Prototyping Platform,” in FCCM, 2011.
[13] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Error Patterns in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Measurement, Characteri-
     zation, and Analysis,” in DATE, 2012.
[14] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold Voltage Distribution in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Characteri-
     zation, Analysis, and Modeling,” in DATE, 2013.
[15] Y. Cai, O. Mutlu, E. F. Haratsch, and K. Mai, “Program Interference in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Characterization,
     Modeling, and Mitigation,” in ICCD, 2013.
[16] Y. Cai, G. Yalcin, O. Mutlu, E. F. Haratsch, O. Unsal, A. Cristal, and K. Mai, “Neighbor-Cell Assisted Error Correction
     for MLC NAND Flash Memories,” in SIGMETRICS, 2014.
[17] K. Chandrasekar, S. Goossens, C. Weis, M. Koedam, B. Akesson, N. Wehn, and K. Goossens, “Exploiting Expendable
     Process-Margins in DRAMs for Run-Time Performance Optimization,” in DATE, 2014.
[18] K. K. Chang, “Understanding and Improving the Latency of DRAM-Based Memory Systems,” Ph.D. dissertation,
     Carnegie Mellon Univ., 2017.
[19] K. K. Chang, A. Kashyap, H. Hassan, S. Ghose, K. Hsieh, D. Lee, T. Li, G. Pekhimenko, S. Khan, and O. Mutlu,
     “Understanding Latency Variation in Modern DRAM Chips: Experimental Characterization, Analysis, and Optimization,”
     in SIGMETRICS, 2016.
[20] K. K. Chang, A. G. Yaglikci, A. Agrawal, N. Chatterjee, S. Ghose, A. Kashyap, H. Hassan, D. Lee, M. O’Connor, and
     O. Mutlu, “Understanding Reduced-Voltage Operation in Modern DRAM Devices: Experimental Characterization,
     Analysis, and Mechanisms,” in SIGMETRICS, 2017.
[21] C.-P. Chen, H.-T. Lue, C.-C. Hsieh, K.-P. Chang, K.-Y. Hsieh, and C.-Y. Lu, “Study of Fast Initial Charge Loss and Its
     Impact on the Programmed States Vt Distribution of Charge-Trapping NAND Flash,” in IEDM, 2010.
[22] C.-L. Chen, “High-Speed Decoding of BCH Codes (Corresp.),” TIT, 1981.
[23] B. Choi, S. H. Jang, J. Yoon, J. Lee, M. Jeon, Y. Lee, J. Han, J. Lee, D. M. Kim, D. H. Kim et al., “Comprehensive Evaluation
     of Early Retention (Fast Charge Loss Within a Few Seconds) Characteristics in Tube-Type 3-D NAND Flash Memory,”
     in VLSIT, 2016.
[24] C. M. Compagnoni, M. Ghidotti, A. L. Lacaita, A. S. Spinelli, and A. Visconti, “Random Telegraph Noise Effect on the
     Programmed Threshold-Voltage Distribution of Flash Memories,” IEEE EDL, 2009.
[25] E. Deal, “Trends in NAND Flash Memory Error Correction,” Cyclic Design, 2009.
[26] R. Degraeve, F. Schuler, B. Kaczer, M. Lorenzini, D. Wellekens, P. Hendrickx, M. van Duuren, G. J. M. Dormans, J. van
     Houdt, L. Haspeslagh, G. Groeseneken, and G. Tempel, “Analytical Percolation Model for Predicting Anomalous
     Charge Loss in Flash Memories,” TED, 2004.
[27] R. H. Fowler and L. Nordheim, “Electron Emission in Intense Electric Fields,” in Proc. Royal Society of London A, 1928.
[28] A. Fukami, S. Ghose, Y. Luo, Y. Cai, and O. Mutlu, “Improving the Reliability of Chip-Off Forensic Analysis of NAND
     Flash Memory Devices,” Digital Investigation, 2017.
[29] A. Ghetti, C. M. Compagnoni, A. S. Spinelli, and A. Visconti, “Comprehensive Analysis of Random Telegraph Noise
     Instability and Its Scaling in Deca-Nanometer Flash Memories,” IEEE TED, 2009.
[30] S. Ghose, A. G. Yağlıkçı, R. Gupta, D. Lee, K. Kudrolli, W. X. Liu, H. Hassan, K. K. Chang, N. Chatterjee, A. Agrawal,
     M. O’Connor, and O. Mutlu, “What Your DRAM Power Models Are Not Telling You: Lessons from a Detailed Experi-
     mental Study,” in SIGMETRICS, 2018.
[31] A. Grossi, C. Zambelli, and P. Olivo, “Reliability of 3D NAND Flash Memories,” in 3D Flash Memories. Springer, 2016.
[32] K. Ha, J. Jeong, and J. Kim, “A Read-Disturb Management Technique for High-Density NAND Flash Memory,” in APSys,
     2013.
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                                                     31

[33] K. Ha, J. Jeong, and J. Kim, “An Integrated Approach for Managing Read Disturbs in High-Density NAND Flash
     Memory,” TCAD, 2016.
[34] T. Hamamoto, S. Sugiura, and S. Sawada, “On the Retention Time Distribution of Dynamic Random Access Memory
     (DRAM),” IEEE TED, 1998.
[35] H. Hassan, N. Vijaykumar, S. Khan, S. Ghose, K. Chang, G. Pekhimenko, D. Lee, O. Ergin, and O. Mutlu, “SoftMC: A
     Flexible and Practical Open-Source Infrastructure for Enabling Experimental DRAM Studies,” in HPCA, 2017.
[36] A. Hocquenghem, “Codes Correcteurs d’Erreurs,” Chiffres, 1959.
[37] J. Huang, A. Badam, L. Caulfield, S. Nath, S. Sengupta, B. Sharma, and M. K. Qureshi, “FlashBlox: Achieving Both
     Performance Isolation and Uniform Lifetime for Virtualized SSDs,” in FAST, 2017.
[38] C.-H. Hung, M.-F. Chang, Y.-S. Yang, Y.-J. Kuo, T.-N. Lai, S.-J. Shen, J.-Y. Hsu, S.-N. Hung, H.-T. Lue, Y.-H. Shih et al.,
     “Layer-Aware Program-and-Read Schemes for 3D Stackable Vertical-Gate BE-SONOS NAND Flash Against Cross-Layer
     Process Variations,” JSSC, 2015.
[39] J. Im, W. Jeong, D. Kim, S. Nam, D. Shim, M. Choi, H. Yoon, D. Kim, Y. Kim, H. W. Park, D. Kwak, S. Park, S. Yoon,
     W. Hahn, J. Ryu, S. Shim, K. Kang, S. Choi, J. Ihm, Y. Min, I. Kim, D. Lee, J. Cho, O. Kwon, J. Lee, M. Kim, S. Joo, J. Jang,
     S. Hwang, D. Byeon, H. Yang, K. Park, K. Kyung, and J. Choi, “7.2 A 128Gb 3b/Cell V-NAND Flash Memory with 1Gb/s
     I/O Rate,” in ISSCC, 2015.
[40] J. Jeong, S. S. Hahn, S. Lee, and J. Kim, “Lifetime Improvement of NAND Flash-Based Storage Systems Using Dynamic
     Program and Erase Scaling,” in FAST, 2014.
[41] X. Jimenez, D. Novo, and P. Ienne, “Wear Unleveling: Improving NAND Flash Lifetime by Balancing Page Endurance,”
     in FAST, 2014.
[42] S.-M. Joe, J.-H. Yi, S.-K. Park, H. Shin, B.-G. Park, Y. J. Park, and J.-H. Lee, “Threshold Voltage Fluctuation by Random
     Telegraph Noise in Floating Gate NAND Flash Memory String,” IEEE TED, 2011.
[43] M. Jung, D. M. Mathew, É. F. Zulian, C. Weis, and N. Wehn, “A New Bank Sensitive DRAMPower Model for Efficient
     Design Space Exploration,” in PATMOS, 2016.
[44] M. Jung, D. M. Mathew, C. C. Rheinländer, C. Weis, and N. Wehn, “A Platform to Analyze DDR3 DRAM’s Power and
     Retention Time,” IEEE Design and Test, 2017.
[45] D. Kang, W. Jeong, C. Kim, D. Kim, Y. Cho, K. Kang, J. Ryu, K. Kang, S. Lee, W. Kim, H. Lee, J. Yu, N. Choi, D. Jang,
     J. Ihm, D. Kim, Y. Min, M. Kim, A. Park, J. Son, I. Kim, P. Kwak, B. Jung, D. Lee, H. Kim, H. Yang, D. Byeon, K. Park,
     K. Kyung, and J. Choi, “7.1 256Gb 3b/Cell V-NAND Flash Memory with 48 Stacked WL Layers,” in ISSCC, 2016.
[46] S. Khan, D. Lee, Y. Kim, A. Alameldeen, C. Wilkerson, and O. Mutlu, “The Efficacy of Error Mitigation Techniques for
     DRAM Retention Failures: A Comparative Experimental Study,” in SIGMETRICS, 2014.
[47] S. Khan, D. Lee, and O. Mutlu, “PARBOR: An Efficient System-Level Technique to Detect Data-Dependent Failures in
     DRAM,” in DSN, 2016.
[48] S. Khan, C. Wilkerson, D. Lee, A. R. Alameldeen, and O. Mutlu, “A Case for Memory Content-Based Detection and
     Mitigation of Data-Dependent Failures in DRAM,” IEEE CAL, 2016.
[49] S. Khan, C. Wilkerson, Z. Wang, A. R. Alameldeen, D. Lee, and O. Mutlu, “Detecting and Mitigating Data-Dependent
     DRAM Failures by Exploiting Current Memory Content,” in MICRO, 2017.
[50] C. Kim, D.-H. Kim, W. Jeong, H.-J. Kim, I. H. Park, H.-W. Park, J. Lee, J. Park, Y.-L. Ahn, J. Y. Lee et al., “A 512-Gb
     3-b/Cell 64-Stacked WL 3-D-NAND Flash Memory,” JSSC, 2018.
[51] J. S. Kim, M. Patel, H. Hassan, and O. Mutlu, “The DRAM Latency PUF: Quickly Evaluating Physical Unclonable
     Functions by Exploiting the Latency–Reliability Tradeoff in Modern DRAM Devices,” in HPCA, 2018.
[52] Y. Kim, R. Daly, J. Kim, C. Fallin, J. H. Lee, D. Lee, C. Wilkerson, K. Lai, and O. Mutlu, “Flipping Bits in Memory Without
     Accessing Them: An Experimental Study of DRAM Disturbance Errors,” in ISCA, 2014.
[53] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On Information and Sufficiency,” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1951.
[54] D. Lee, “Reducing DRAM Energy at Low Cost by Exploiting Heterogeneity,” Ph.D. dissertation, Carnegie Mellon Univ.,
     2016.
[55] D. Lee, S. Khan, L. Subramanian, S. Ghose, R. Ausavarungnirun, G. Pekhimenko, V. Seshadri, and O. Mutlu, “Design-
     Induced Latency Variation in Modern DRAM Chips: Characterization, Analysis, and Latency Reduction Mechanisms,”
     in SIGMETRICS, 2017.
[56] D. Lee, Y. Kim, G. Pekhimenko, S. Khan, V. Seshadri, K. Chang, and O. Mutlu, “Adaptive-Latency DRAM: Optimizing
     DRAM Timing for the Common-Case,” in HPCA, 2015.
[57] J.-D. Lee, S.-H. Hur, and J.-D. Choi, “Effects of Floating-Gate Interference on NAND Flash Memory Cell Operation,”
     IEEE EDL, 2002.
[58] S. Lee, J. Lee, I. Park, J. Park, S. Yun, M. Kim, J. Lee, M. Kim, K. Lee, T. Kim, B. Cho, D. Cho, S. Yun, J. Im, H. Yim, K. Kang,
     S. Jeon, S. Jo, Y. Ahn, S. Joe, S. Kim, D. Woo, J. Park, H. W. Park, Y. Kim, J. Park, Y. Choi, M. Hirano, J. Ihm, B. Jeong,
     S. Lee, M. Kim, H. Lee, S. Seo, H. Jeon, C. Kim, H. Kim, J. Kim, Y. Yim, H. Kim, D. Byeon, H. Yang, K. Park, K. Kyung,
     and J. Choi, “7.5 A 128Gb 2b/Cell NAND Flash Memory in 14nm Technology with tPROG=640µs and 800MB/s I/O
32                                                                                                            Y. Luo et al.

     Rate,” in ISSCC, 2016.
[59] Y. Lee, H. Yoo, I. Yoo, and I.-C. Park, “6.4 Gb/s Multi-Threaded BCH Encoder and Decoder for Multi-Channel SSD
     Controllers,” in ISSCC, 2012.
[60] J. Li, K. Zhao, X. Zhang, J. Ma, M. Zhao, and T. Zhang, “How Much Can Data Compressibility Help to Improve NAND
     Flash Memory Lifetime?” in FAST, 2015.
[61] J. Liu, B. Jaiyen, Y. Kim, C. Wilkerson, and O. Mutlu, “An Experimental Study of Data Retention Behavior in Modern
     DRAM Devices: Implications for Retention Time Profiling Mechanisms,” in ISCA, 2013.
[62] J. Liu, B. Jaiyen, R. Veras, and O. Mutlu, “RAIDR: Retention-Aware Intelligent DRAM Refresh,” in ISCA, 2012.
[63] Y. Luo, Y. Cai, S. Ghose, J. Choi, and O. Mutlu, “WARM: Improving NAND Flash Memory Lifetime with Write-Hotness
     Aware Retention Management,” in MSST, 2015.
[64] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, and O. Mutlu, “Enabling Accurate and Practical Online Flash Channel Modeling
     for Modern MLC NAND Flash Memory,” JSAC, 2016.
[65] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, and O. Mutlu, “HeatWatch: Improving 3D NAND Flash Memory Device
     Reliability by Exploiting Self-Recovery and Temperature Awareness,” in HPCA, 2018.
[66] D. M. Mathew, M. Schultheis, C. C. Rheinländer, C. Sudarshan, C. Weis, N. Wehn, and M. Jung, “An Analysis on
     Retention Error Behavior and Power Consumption of Recent DDR4 DRAMs,” in DATE, 2018.
[67] N. Matthew and R. Stones, Beginning Linux Programming. John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[68] J. Meza, Q. Wu, S. Kumar, and O. Mutlu, “A Large-Scale Study of Flash Memory Failures in the Field,” in SIGMETRICS,
     2015.
[69] N. Mielke, T. Marquart, N.Wu, J.Kessenich, H. Belgal, E. Schares, and F. Triverdi, “Bit Error Rate in NAND Flash
     Memories,” in IRPS, 2008.
[70] K. Mizoguchi, T. Takahashi, S. Aritome, and K. Takeuchi, “Data-Retention Characteristics Comparison of 2D and 3D
     TLC NAND Flash Memories,” in IMW, 2017.
[71] O. Mutlu, “The RowHammer Problem and Other Issues We May Face as Memory Becomes Denser,” in DATE, 2017.
[72] I. Narayanan, D. Wang, M. Jeon, B. Sharma, L. Caulfield, A. Sivasubramaniam, B. Cutler, J. Liu, B. Khessib, and K. Vaid,
     “SSD Failures in Datacenters: What? When? And Why?” in SYSTOR, 2016.
[73] K. Naruke, S. Taguchi, and M. Wada, “Stress Induced Leakage Current Limiting to Scale Down EEPROM Tunnel Oxide
     Thickness,” IEDM Tech. Digest, 1988.
[74] Y. Pan, G. Dong, Q. Wu, and T. Zhang, “Quasi-Nonvolatile SSD: Trading Flash Memory Nonvolatility to Improve
     Storage System Performance for Enterprise Applications,” in HPCA, 2012.
[75] Y. Pan, G. Dong, and T. Zhang, “Exploiting Memory Device Wear-Out Dynamics to Improve NAND Flash Memory
     System Performance,” in FAST, 2011.
[76] N. Papandreou, T. Parnell, H. Pozidis, T. Mittelholzer, E. Eleftheriou, C. Camp, T. Griffin, G. Tressler, and A. Walls,
     “Using Adaptive Read Voltage Thresholds to Enhance the Reliability of MLC NAND Flash Memory Systems,” in GLSVLSI,
     2014.
[77] J. Park, J. Jeong, S. Lee, Y. Song, and J. Kim, “Improving Performance and Lifetime of NAND Storage Systems Using
     Relaxed Program Sequence,” in DAC, 2016.
[78] J. K. Park, D.-I. Moon, Y.-K. Choi, S.-H. Lee, K.-H. Lee, S. H. Pyi, and B. J. Cho, “Origin of Transient Vth Shift After
     Erase and Its Impact on 2D/3D Structure Charge Trap Flash Memory Cell Operations,” in IEDM, 2012.
[79] K.-T. Park, M. Kang, D. Kim, S.-W. Hwang, B. Y. Choi, Y.-T. Lee, C. Kim, and K. Kim, “A Zeroing Cell-to-Cell Interference
     Page Architecture with Temporary LSB Storing and Parallel MSB Program Scheme for MLC NAND Flash Memories,”
     JSSC, 2008.
[80] K. Park, S. Nam, D. Kim, P. Kwak, D. Lee, Y. Choi, M. Choi, D. Kwak, D. Kim, M. Kim, H. W. Park, S. Shim, K. Kang,
     S. Park, K. Lee, H. Yoon, K. Ko, D. Shim, Y. Ahn, J. Ryu, D. Kim, K. Yun, J. Kwon, S. Shin, D. Byeon, K. Choi, J. Han,
     K. Kyung, J. Choi, and K. Kim, “Three-Dimensional 128 Gb MLC Vertical NAND Flash Memory With 24-WL Stacked
     Layers and 50 MB/s High-Speed Programming,” JSSC, 2015.
[81] T. Parnell, N. Papandreou, T. Mittelholzer, and H. Pozidis, “Modelling of the Threshold Voltage Distributions of
     Sub-20nm NAND Flash Memory,” in GLOBECOM, 2014.
[82] M. Patel, J. S. Kim, and O. Mutlu, “The Reach Profiler (REAPER): Enabling the Mitigation of DRAM Retention Failures
     via Profiling at Aggressive Conditions,” in ISCA, 2017.
[83] D. A. Patterson, G. Gibson, and R. H. Katz, “A Case for Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks (RAID),” in SIGMOD,
     1988.
[84] P. Prabhu, A. Akel, L. M. Grupp, S. Y. Wing-Kei, G. E. Suh, E. Kan, and S. Swanson, “Extracting Device Fingerprints
     from Flash Memory by Exploiting Physical Variations,” in TRUST, 2011.
[85] M. Qureshi, D. H. Kim, S. Khan, P. Nair, and O. Mutlu, “AVATAR: A Variable-Retention-Time (VRT) Aware Refresh for
     DRAM Systems,” in DSN, 2015.
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                                                  33

[86] Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., “Samsung V-NAND Technology,” https://www.samsung.com/us/business/oem-solutions/
     pdfs/V-NAND_technology_WP.pdf, white paper. 2014.
[87] B. Schroeder, R. Lagisetty, and A. Merchant, “Flash Reliability in Production: The Expected and the Unexpected,” in
     FAST, 2016.
[88] S. Seabold and J. Perktold, “Statsmodels: Econometric and Statistical Modeling with Python,” in SciPy, 2010.
[89] K.-D. Suh, B.-H. Suh, Y.-H. Lim, J.-K. Kim, Y.-J. Choi, Y.-N. Koh, S.-S. Lee, S.-C. Suk-Chon, B.-S. Choi, J.-S. Yum et al., “A
     3.3 V 32 Mb NAND Flash Memory With Incremental Step Pulse Programming Scheme,” JSSC, 1995.
[90] TechInsights, Inc., “NAND Flash Memory Roadmap,” http://www.techinsights.com/NAND-flash-roadmap/, 2016.
[91] W. Wang, T. Xie, and D. Zhou, “Understanding the Impact of Threshold Voltage on MLC Flash Memory Performance
     and Reliability,” in ICS, 2014.
[92] Y. Wang, L. Dong, and R. Mao, “P-Alloc: Process-Variation Tolerant Reliability Management for 3D Charge-Trapping
     Flash Memory,” TECS, 2017.
[93] E. H. Wilson, M. Jung, and M. T. Kandemir, “ZombieNAND: Resurrecting Dead NAND Flash for Improved SSD
     Longevity,” in MASCOTS, 2014.
[94] Q. Xiong, F. Wu, Z. Lu, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhou, Y. Chu, C. Xie, and P. Huang, “Characterizing 3D Floating Gate NAND Flash,”
     in SIGMETRICS, 2017.
[95] Q. Xiong, F. Wu, Z. Lu, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhou, Y. Chu, C. Xie, and P. Huang, “Characterizing 3D Floating Gate NAND Flash:
     Observations, Analyses, and Implications,” TOS, 2018.
[96] V. Ye, “The Solution to Bit Error Non-Uniformity of 3D NAND,” in Flash Memory Summit, 2017.
[97] E. Zhang, W. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Jin, G. Zhu, Q. Sun, D. W. Zhang, P. Zhou, and F. Xiu, “Tunable Charge-Trap Memory
     Based on Few-Layer MoS2,” ACS Nano, 2014.
[98] X. Zhang, J. Li, H. Wang, K. Zhao, and T. Zhang, “Reducing Solid-State Storage Device Write Stress Through Oppor-
     tunistic In-Place Delta Compression,” in FAST, 2016.
34                                                                                                           Y. Luo et al.

A     APPENDIX
A.1    Write-Induced Errors
We analyze how each type of write-induced error affects the RBER and the threshold voltage
distribution of 3D NAND flash memory.
   A.1.1 Program Errors. Program errors occur when the data is incorrectly written to the NAND
flash memory [4, 9, 11, 79]. Such errors are introduced when multiple programming operations
are required to write data to a single cell. For example, in many MLC NAND flash memory
devices, two-step programming [4, 79] is employed. Two-step programming uses two separate
partial programming steps to write data to an MLC NAND flash cell. In the first step, the flash
controller writes only the LSB to the cell, setting the cell to a temporary voltage state. In the second
step, the controller writes the MSB to the cell, but in order to perform this write, the controller must
first determine the current voltage state of the cell. This requires reading the partially-programmed
data from the cell, during which an error may occur. This error causes the controller to incorrectly
set the final voltage state of the cell during the second programming step, and, thus, is called a
program error. Prior work [4] shows that program errors occur in state-of-the-art planar MLC
NAND flash memory.
   Current generations of 3D NAND flash memory use one-shot programming [4, 9, 11, 79], which
programs both the LSB and MSB of a cell at the same time. As a result, current 3D NAND flash
memory devices do not experience program errors. Our measurements in Figure 4 confirm the lack
of program errors in 3D NAND flash memory. In an MLC NAND flash memory that has program
errors, the threshold voltage distributions of the ER and P1 states have secondary peaks near the P2
and P3 states, respectively [4]. This is because program errors affect only the LSB, since only the
LSB is being read during the second programming step. Since there is no second peak in Figure 4,
there are no program errors.
   Program errors may appear in future 3D NAND flash memory devices. In planar NAND flash
memory, two-step programming was introduced when planar MLC NAND flash memory transi-
tioned to the 40 nm manufacturing process technology node, in order to reduce the number of
program interference errors [79]. A similar transition may occur in the future to continue scaling the
density of 3D NAND flash memory, especially as it becomes increasingly difficult to add more layers
into a 3D NAND flash memory chip. Thus, we conclude that today’s 3D NAND flash memories do
not have program errors, but program errors may appear in future generations.
   A.1.2 Program/Erase Cycling Errors. A P/E cycling error occurs because of the natural variation
of the threshold voltage of cells in each state [14, 69] due to the inaccuracy of each program and
erase operation (see Section 2.2). Such inaccuracy during program and erase operations increases
as the P/E cycle count increases. To study the impact of P/E cycling errors, we randomly select a
flash block within each 3D NAND chip, and wear out the block by programming random data to
each page in the block until the block reaches 16K P/E cycles. Using the methodology described in
Section 4.1, we obtain the overall RBER and the threshold voltage of each cell at various P/E cycle
counts.10
   Observations. Figure 17 shows how the mean and standard deviation of the threshold voltage
distribution of each state change as a function of the P/E cycle count, when we fit our voltage
measurements for each state to a Gaussian model. Each subfigure in the top row represents the
mean for a different state; each subfigure in the bottom row represents the standard deviation for
a different state. The blue dots shows the measured data; each orange line shows a linear trend
10 Due to limitations with our experimental testing platform, each data point at a particular P/E cycle count has a retention

time of 50 minutes.
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                                                                35

fitted to the measured data. The x-axis shows the P/E cycle count; the y-axis shows the mean
(Figures 17a–17d) or the standard deviation (Figures 17e–17h) of the threshold voltage distribution
of each state, in voltage steps. We make four observations from Figure 17. First, the mean and
standard deviation of all states increase linearly as the P/E cycle count increases. We fit a line
using linear regression, shown as an orange dotted line in each subfigure.11 Second, the threshold
voltage distributions of the ER and P1 states shift to higher voltages, while the distributions of the
P2 and P3 states shift to lower voltages, causing the distributions to move closer to the middle of
the threshold voltage range. Third, the threshold voltage distributions of all four states become
wider (i.e., the standard deviation increases) as the P/E cycle count increases. Since the distributions
shift towards the middle of the threshold voltage range and become wider as the P/E cycle count
increases, the distributions become closer to each other, which increases the raw bit error rate.
Fourth, the magnitude of the threshold voltage shift and the widening of the distributions is much
larger for the ER state than it is for the other three states (i.e., P1, P2, P3). Therefore, ER↔P1 errors
(i.e., an error that shifts a cell that is originally programmed in the ER state to the P1 state, or vice
versa) increase faster than other errors with the P/E cycle count.

                           (a) ER Mean                      (b) P1 Mean                     (c) P2 Mean                     (d) P3 Mean
                                                 130                             200                             270                Measured
 Normalized Vth




                  30
                                                                                                                                    Linear Fit
                                                 120                             190                             260
                  20
                                                 110                             180                             250
                  10
                                                 100                             170                             240
                   0
                       0      5      10    15          0      5      10    15          0      5      10    15          0      5      10    15
                        P/E Cycle Count (×103)          P/E Cycle Count (×103)          P/E Cycle Count (×103)          P/E Cycle Count (×103)

                           (e) ER Stdev                     (f) P1 Stdev                   (g) P2 Stdev                    (h) P3 Stdev
                  21                              13                              13                              13
 Normalized Vth




                  20                              12                              12                              12

                  19                              11                              11                              11

                  18                              10                              10                              10

                  17                               9                               9                               9
                       0      5      10    15          0      5      10    15          0      5      10    15          0      5      10    15
                        P/E Cycle Count (×103)          P/E Cycle Count (×103)          P/E Cycle Count (×103)          P/E Cycle Count (×103)



Fig. 17. Mean and standard deviation of our Gaussian threshold voltage distribution model of each state,
versus P/E cycle count.

   Figure 18 shows how the RBER increases as the P/E cycle count increases. The top graph breaks
down the errors into which bit (i.e., LSB or MSB) they occur in. The bottom graph breaks down
the errors based on how the error changed the cell state due to a shift in the cell threshold voltage.
If the error caused either the LSB or MSB (but not both) to be read incorrectly, we refer to that
error as a single-bit error (ER ↔ P1, P1 ↔ P2, and P2 ↔ P3 in the graph). If both the LSB and MSB
are read incorrectly as a result of the error, we refer to that error as a multi-bit error. We make
four observations from Figure 18. First, both LSB and MSB errors increase as the P/E cycle count
increases, following an exponential trend. Second, ER ↔ P1 errors increase at a much faster rate
as the P/E cycle count increases, compared to the other types of cell state changes, and ER ↔ P1
errors become the dominant MSB error type when the P/E cycle count reaches 8K P/E cycles (6K is
11 For the ER state, a linear fit has a 5.9% higher root mean square error than a power-law fit. However, we choose the linear

fit due to its simplicity.
36                                                                                                                          Y. Luo et al.

the cross-over point). This is because the electrons trapped in the cell during wearout prevent the
cell from being set to very low threshold voltages. As a result, the threshold voltage distribution of
the ER state shifts and widens more than the distributions of the other states, as we see in Figure 17.
Third, multi-bit errors are less common, but they occur as early as at 1K P/E cycles. Only a large
difference between the target and actual threshold voltage can lead to a multi-bit error, which is
unlikely to happen. Fourth, MSBs have a 2.1× higher error rate than LSBs, on average across all
P/E cycle counts. This is because the flash controller must use two read reference voltages to read a
cell’s MSB, but needs only one read reference voltage to read a cell’s LSB.


                                                                                                             (a)
                                                     ER ↔ P1           P2 ↔ P3
                                        10− 3        P1 ↔ P2           Multi-bit
                                 RBER




                                        10− 5

                                        10− 7

                                        10− 2
                                                     MSB            MSB fit
                                        10− 3        LSB            LSB fit
                                 RBER




                                        10− 4

                                        10− 5                                                                (b)

                                        10− 6
                                                0      2        4        6      8     10    12          14      16
                                                                     P/E Cycle Count (×103)


                                            Fig. 18. RBER due to P/E cycling errors vs. P/E cycle count.


   Figure 19 shows how the optimal read reference voltages change as the P/E cycle count increases.
This figure contains three subfigures, each of which shows the optimal voltage for Va , Vb , and
Vc (see Figure 1a). We make two observations from this figure. First, the optimal voltage for Va
increases rapidly as the P/E cycle count increases: after 16K P/E cycles, the voltage goes up by more
than 20 voltage steps. Second, the optimal voltages for Vb and Vc remain almost constant as the P/E
cycle count increases: neither voltage changes by more than 4 voltage steps after 16K P/E cycles, as
expected from the lack of change in P1, P2, and P3 distribution means shown in Figure 17.

                                        (a) Optimal Va                  (b) Optimal Vb                 (c) Optimal Vc
                            85                                                                230
                                                               160                                             Measured
                            80                                                                225              Linear Fit
           Normalized Vth




                                                               155
                            75                                                                220
                                                               150
                            70                                                                215
                                                               145
                            65                                                                210
                                                               140
                                 0     5      10    15               0     5      10    15          0     5      10    15
                                 P/E Cycle Count (×103)              P/E Cycle Count (×103)         P/E Cycle Count (×103)


                                            Fig. 19. Optimal read reference voltages vs. P/E cycle count.
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                                      37

   Insights. To compare the error characteristics of 3D NAND flash memory to that of planar
NAND flash memory, we take the equivalent observations on planar NAND flash memory reported
by prior works [14, 64, 81], and compare them to our findings for 3D NAND flash memory, which
we just described. We find two key differences. First, for 3D NAND flash memory, the threshold
voltage distributions for the P2 state and the P3 state shift to lower voltages as the P/E cycle count
increases. In contrast, for planar NAND flash memory, the distributions of both states shift to higher
voltages [14, 64, 81]. One possible source of this change is the increased impact of early retention
loss with P/E cycle count, which lowers the threshold voltage of cells in higher-voltage states (i.e.,
P2 and P3) [23]. Second, for 3D NAND flash memory, the change in the mean threshold voltage
of each state distribution exhibits a linear increase. However, in sub-20 nm planar NAND flash
memory, the change in the mean threshold voltage exhibits a power-law-based increase with P/E
cycle count [64, 81]. In sub-20 nm planar NAND flash memory, the mean threshold voltage of each
state distribution increases more rapidly at lower P/E cycle counts than in higher P/E cycle counts,
resulting in the power-law-based behavior. However, we note that planar NAND flash memory
using an older manufacturing process technology (e.g., 20–24 nm) exhibits a linear increase with
P/E cycle count for the distribution mean [14], just as we observe for 3D NAND flash memory.
Thus, there is evidence that when the manufacturing process technology scales below a certain size,
the change in the distribution mean transitions from linear behavior to power-law-based behavior
with respect to P/E cycle count. As a result, when future 3D NAND flash memory scales down
to a sub-20 nm manufacturing process technology node, we might expect that it too will exhibit
power-law behavior for the change in the distribution mean. We conclude that the differences we
observe between the P/E cycling effect in 3D NAND flash memory and planar NAND flash memory
are mainly caused by the use of a significantly different manufacturing process technology node.
   A.1.3 Program Interference. When a cell (which we call the aggressor cell) is being programmed,
cell-to-cell program interference can cause the threshold voltage of nearby flash cells (which we
call victim cells) to increase unintentionally [15, 16] (see Section 2.2). In 3D NAND flash memory,
there are two types of program interference that can occur. The first, wordline-to-wordline program
interference, affects victim cells along the z-axis of the cell that is programmed (see Figure 3). These
victim cells are physically next to the cell that is programmed, and belong to the same bitline (and
thus the same flash block). The second, bitline-to-bitline program interference, affects victim cells
along the x-axis or y-axis of the cell that is programmed. Bitline-to-bitline program interference
can affect victim cells in the same wordline (i.e., cells on the y-axis), or it can affect victim cells that
belong to other flash blocks (i.e., cells on the x-axis).
   To quantitatively analyze the effect of program interference on cell threshold voltage and
raw bit error rate, we use the same experimental data that we have for P/E cycling errors (see
Section A.1.2). A correlation exists between the amount by which program interference changes
the threshold voltage of a victim cell (∆Vvict im ) and the threshold voltage change of the aggressor
cell (∆Vaддr essor ) [15]. As a result of this interference correlation, the threshold voltage of a victim
cell is dependent on the threshold voltage of the aggressor cell. The strength of this correlation can
be quantified as ∆V∆Vaддr
                       v ic t im
                           essor
                                 , which is a property of the NAND device and is largely dependent on
the distance between the cells [57]. After programming randomly-generated data to the victim cells
and the aggressor cells, we estimate ∆Vaддr essor by calculating the threshold voltage difference
between the aggressor cell’s threshold voltage in its final state and that in the ER state. We estimate
∆Vvict im by calculating the difference between the victim cell’s threshold voltage with and without
program interference.12
12 The cell threshold voltage without program interference is obtained by reading the cell before the next wordline is

programmed.
38                                                                                           Y. Luo et al.

   Observations. Figure 20 shows the interference correlation for wordline-to-wordline interfer-
ence and bitline-to-bitline interference on a victim cell, for aggressor cells of varying distance from
the victim cell. For example, the victim cell in BL M, WL N has an interference correlation of 2.7%
with the next wordline aggressor cell in BL M, WL N+1, which means that, if the threshold voltage
of the aggressor cell increases by ∆V , the threshold voltage of the victim cell increases by 0.027∆V
due to wordline-to-wordline program interference. We make two observations from this figure.
First, the interference correlation of the next wordline aggressor cell (i.e., 2.7%) is over an order
of magnitude higher than that of any other aggressor cell, of which the maximum interference
correlation is only 0.080% (the previous wordline aggressor cell in BL M, WL N-1). Thus, the program
interference to the victim cell, is dominated by wordline-to-wordline interference from the next
wordline. Second, all of the other types of interference have much smaller interference correlation
values.


                 Block K+1
              Block K BL M-1             BL M        BL M+1             Previous wordline

               WL N-1                   .080%
                                                                        Next bitline

               WL N        -.040%       Victim       -.040%
                                                                        Next wordline+bitline

               WL N+1       .014%        2.7%        .014%

                                                                        Next wordline
               WL N+2                   .057%                           z
                                                                          x
                                                                              y

Fig. 20. Interference correlation for a victim cell, as a result of programming aggressor cells of varying
distances from the victim cell.


   Figure 21 shows how much the threshold voltage of a victim cell shifts (∆Vvict im ) when a
neighboring aggressor cell is programmed to the P3 state, which generates the largest possible
program interference. Each curve represents a certain program interference type (i.e., Next WL or
Prev WL) and a certain state of the victim cell (V). The curves that have a significant amount of
threshold voltage shift (e.g., >6 voltage steps) due to program interference are shown in Figure 21(a);
the curves that have a small amount of threshold voltage shift are shown in Figure 21(b). We make
three observations from Figure 21. First, the effect of program interference decreases as the P/E
cycle count increases (along the x-axis, from left to right). As we discuss in Section A.1.2, electrons
trapped in a flash cell due to wearout prevent the cell from returning to the lowest threshold
voltage values during an erase operation. As a result, as the P/E cycle count increases, the mean
threshold voltage of the ER state increases. This causes ∆Vaддr essor to decrease as the P/E cycle
count increases, because the starting voltage of the aggressor cell increases but its target voltage
after programming remains the same. As we discuss above, the interference correlation (i.e., the
ratio between ∆Vaддr essor and ∆Vvict im ) is largely a function of the distance between flash cells.
Thus, since ∆Vaддr essor decreases, ∆Vvict im also decreases with the P/E cycle count. Second, the
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                                         39

amount of program interference induced by an aggressor cell in the next wordline decreases when
the victim cell is in a higher-voltage state (Next WL curves in Figure 21a, from top to bottom). This
is likely because the voltage difference between the aggressor cell and the victim cell is lower when
the victim cell is in a higher-voltage state, reducing the the threshold voltage shift due to program
interference. Third, the program interference induced by an aggressor cell in the previous wordline
(Prev WL curves in Figure 21) affects the threshold voltage distribution of only the ER state for a
victim cell, but it has little effect on the distributions of the other three states (i.e., P1, P2, P3). This
is a result of how programming takes place in NAND flash memory. A program operation can only
increase the voltage of a cell due to circuit-level limitations. When the aggressor cell in the previous
wordline is programmed, the victim cell is already in the ER state, and the victim cell’s voltage
increases due to program interference. Some time later, the victim cell is programmed. If the target
state of the victim cell is P1, P2, or P3, the programming operation needs to further increase the
voltage of the cell, and any effects of program interference from the aggressor cell in the previous
wordline are eliminated. If, however, the target state of the victim cell is ER, the programming
operation does not change the victim cell’s voltage, and the effects of program interference from
the aggressor cell in the previous wordline remain.

                             14                                                 7
                                  (a)             V=ER, Next WL                     (b)              V=P1, Prev WL
                             13                   V=P1, Next WL                 6                    V=P2, Prev WL
                                                  V=P2, Next WL                                      V=P3, Prev WL
                             12                                                 5
                                                  V=P3, Next WL
                                                  V=ER, Prev WL                 4
                             11
                  ΔVvictim




                                                                    ΔVvictim




                                                                                3
                             10
                                                                                2
                              9
                                                                                1
                              8
                                                                                0
                              7
                                                                               −1
                                  0          5       10        15                   0          5       10        15
                                        P/E Cycle Count (×103)                            P/E Cycle Count (×103)


        Fig. 21. Amount of threshold voltage shift due to program interference vs. P/E cycle count.

   Insights. We compare the program interference in 3D NAND flash memory to the program
interference observed in planar NAND flash memory, as reported in prior work [15, 16]. We
find one major difference. The maximum interference correlation of program interference from a
directly-adjacent cell is 40% lower in 3D NAND flash memory (2.7%) than in state-of-the-art (20–
24 nm) planar NAND flash memory (4.5% [15]). This is corroborated by findings in prior work [80],
which shows that 3D NAND flash memory has 84% lower program interference than 15–19 nm
planar NAND flash memory. The lower interference correlation in 3D NAND flash memory is
due to the larger manufacturing process technology node (30–50 nm for the chips we test) that
it uses compared to state-of-the-art planar NAND flash memory. The amount of interference
correlation between neighboring cells is a function of the distance between the cells [57]. In a larger
manufacturing process technology node, the flash cells are farther away from each other, causing
the interference correlation to decrease. We note that when future 3D NAND flash memory chips
use smaller manufacturing process technology nodes, the impact of programming interference will
increase, similar to what happened in planar NAND flash memory.
   Note that we are the first to compare how the threshold voltage shift caused by program
interference changes with the P/E cycle count. As we discuss in our first observation for Figure 21,
the program interference effect decreases as the P/E cycle count increases because the increasing
40                                                                                         Y. Luo et al.

effects of wearout reduce the value of ∆Vaддr essor during programming. We conclude that the 40%
reduction in the program interference effect we observe in 3D NAND flash memory compared
to planar NAND flash memory is mainly caused by the difference in manufacturing process
technology.

A.2   Early Retention Loss
In this section, we present the results and analysis of retention loss in 3D NAND flash memory in
addition to the key findings in Section 4.3. We use the same methodology as described in Section 4.3.
   Observations. Figure 22 shows how the mean and the standard deviation of the threshold
voltage distribution change with retention time. Each subfigure in the top row shows the mean
for a different state; each subfigure in the bottom row show the standard deviation for a different
state. The blue dots show the measured data; each orange line shows a linear trend line fitted to
the measured data. The x-axis shows the retention time in log scale; the y-axis shows the mean
or standard deviation value in voltage steps. We make five observations from this figure. First,
the threshold voltage distribution shifts more when the retention time is low. This is the early
retention loss phenomenon, which occurs because charge that is trapped near the surface of the
charge trap layer is detrapped soon after programming. Second, as the retention time increases,
the voltage values of cells in the P1, P2, and P3 states decrease, while the voltage values of cells
in the ER state increase. This is because the cells in the ER state have negative threshold voltages,
and hence they gain charge over retention time. Third, the threshold voltage distributions of the
ER and P3 states shift faster than the distributions of the P1 and P2 states as the retention time
increases. This is because the ER and P3 states have larger voltage differences from the ground
than the other states. Fourth, retention loss has little effect on the width of the threshold voltage
distribution (i.e., standard deviation values change by less than 1 voltage step after 24 days). This is
because the effects of retention loss (i.e., charge leakage) impact cells at a similar rate, causing all
of the cells within the threshold voltage distribution to lose a similar amount of voltage. Fifth, the
correlation between any distribution parameter (V ) and the retention time (t) can be modeled as a
linear function (shown by the dotted lines in Figure 22): V = A · log(t) + B. A and B are constants
that change based on which parameter V is modeling (i.e., the threshold voltage distribution mean
or standard deviation). Prior work shows that planar NAND flash memory has a similar trend for
retention loss, even though it uses a different flash cell design. We have already compared and
evaluated the differences between 3D NAND and planar NAND flash memory in retention loss
speed in Section 4.3, and provided more detail about the linear function that models the threshold
voltage distribution parameters in Section 5.2.
   Figure 23 shows how the RBER increases with retention time for a block that has endured 10K
P/E cycles. The top graph breaks down the errors according to the change in cell state as a result of
the errors; the bottom graph breaks down the errors into MSB and LSB page errors. We make two
observations from Figure 23, in addition to our observations in Section 4.3. First, retention errors
are dominated by P2 ↔ P3 errors, because the threshold voltage distribution of the P3 state not
only shifts more but also widens more with retention time than the distributions of the other states
(see Figure 22). Although the distribution of the ER state also shifts significantly, there are fewer
ER ↔ P1 errors to begin with. Second, the MSB error rate increases faster than the LSB error rate
as the retention time increases. This is because as the distributions of both the ER and P3 states
shift more than those of the P1 and P2 states, cells in the ER and P3 states are more likely to have
errors. These errors (ER ↔ P1 and P2 ↔ P3) affect the MSB of the cell.
   Insights. We compare the errors due to retention loss in 3D NAND flash memory to those in
planar NAND flash memory, as reported in prior work [6, 7, 69]. We find another major difference
in 3D NAND flash memory in terms of threshold voltage distribution, in addition to those discussed
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                                                                                                                                                    41

                                     (a) ER Mean                                               (b) P1 Mean                                              (c) P2 Mean                                            (d) P3 Mean
                           15
                                                                                                                                            190                                                                         Measured
                                                                                                                                                                                                    260
                                                                                    120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Linear Fit
          Normalized Vth




                                                                   Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                           Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                                                                                   Normalized Vth
                           10
                                                                                                                                            185
                                                                                                                                                                                                    255
                                                                                    115
                            5
                                                                                                                                            180
                                                                                                                                                                                                    250
                                                                                    110
                            0
                                                                                                                                            175
                                                                                                                                                                                                    245
                                                                                    105
                           −5
                                                                                                                                            170
                                                                                                                                                                                                    240
                                                                                    100
                                102 103 104 105 106 107                                   102 103 104 105 106 107                                 102 103 104 105 106 107                                 102 103 104 105 106 107
                                    Retention Time (s)                                        Retention Time (s)                                      Retention Time (s)                                      Retention Time (s)

                                     (e) ER Stdev                                               (f) P1 Stdev                                           (g) P2 Stdev                                            (h) P3 Stdev
                 17.8                                                           11.2                                                    11.5                                                    11.9
Normalized Vth




                                                               Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                       Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                                                                               Normalized Vth
                 17.7                                                           11.1                                                    11.4                                                    11.8


                 17.6                                                           11.0                                                    11.3                                                    11.7


                 17.5                                                           10.9                                                    11.2                                                    11.6


                 17.4                                                           10.8                                                    11.1                                                    11.5
                                    103      105       107                                    103      105       107                                  103      105       107                                  103      105       107
                                    Retention Time (s)                                        Retention Time (s)                                      Retention Time (s)                                      Retention Time (s)



Fig. 22. Mean and standard deviation of our Gaussian threshold voltage distribution model of each state,
versus retention time.


                                                       10− 3
                                                                                      ER ↔ P1             P2 ↔ P3
                                                       10− 4                          P1 ↔ P2                                                                                           (a)
                                                RBER




                                                       10− 5

                                                       10− 6

                                                       10− 3
                                                                                      MSB             MSB Fit
                                                                                      LSB             LSB Fit
                                                RBER




                                                       10− 4

                                                                                                                                                                                        (b)
                                                       10− 5
                                                                102                              103            104        105                                    106                               107
                                                                                                               Retention Time (s)



Fig. 23. RBER vs. retention time, broken down by (a) the state transition of each flash cell, and (b) MSB or
LSB page.


in Section 4.3. We find that the retention loss phenomenon we observe in 3D NAND flash memory
(1) shifts the threshold voltage distributions of the P1, P2 and P3 states lower, and (2) has little effect
on the width of the distribution of each state. In contrast, the retention loss phenomenon observed
in planar NAND flash memory (1) does not shift the P1 and P2 state distributions by much, and
(2) increases the width of each state’s distribution significantly [6]. This indicates that a mechanism
that adjusts the optimal read reference voltage to the threshold voltage shift caused by retention
loss can be more effective on 3D NAND flash memory than on planar NAND flash memory, because
the distributions shift by a greater amount (indicating a greater need for voltage adjustment) with
a smaller amount of overlap between two threshold voltage distributions (reducing the number of
42                                                                                                                 Y. Luo et al.

read errors when the optimal read reference voltage is used). We conclude that, due to the early
retention loss phenomenon we observe in 3D NAND flash memory, the threshold voltage of a flash
cell changes quickly within several hours after programming, leading to significant changes in
RBER and optimal read reference voltage values.

A.3   Read-Induced Errors
In this section, we analyze how each type of read-induced error affects the RBER and the threshold
voltage distribution of 3D NAND flash memory.
    A.3.1 Read Errors. A read error is a type of read-induced error where two reads to a flash
cell may return different data values if the read reference voltage used to read the cell is close
to the cell’s threshold voltage [24, 29, 42] (see Section 2.2). A read error adds uncertainty to the
outcome of every read operation performed by the SSD controller. However, despite the potential
for widespread impact, read errors are not well-studied by prior work.
    To quantify read errors, we use the data we collected in Section 4.3. For each cell, we see if the
actual read outcome (i.e., the bit value output by the flash controller after a read operation) matches
the expected read outcome (i.e., the value that the read should have returned based on the current
voltage of the flash cell). We determine the expected read outcome by comparing Vr ef with Vth (i.e.,
we expect to read 1 if Vt h < Vr e f , because Vr e f is high enough that it should turn on the cell). We
obtain Vt h by combining the outcomes of multiple reads when sweeping the read reference voltage,
thus we expect that the combined output eliminates the impact of read errors and is thus accurate.
We say that a read error occurs if the actual read outcome and the expected read outcome do not
match.
    Observations. Figure 24 shows how the read error rate changes as a function of the read offset
(i.e., Vr e f − Vt h ). We observe that, as the absolute value of the read offset increases, the read error
rate decreases exponentially. This is likely because when Vr ef is closer to Vth (i.e., when Vr ef − Vth
has a smaller absolute value), the amount of noise (i.e., voltage fluctuations) in the sense amplifier
increases exponentially [24, 29]. The larger amount of noise increases the likelihood that the sense
amplifier incorrectly detects whether the cell turns on, which leads to a larger probability that a
read error occurs.

                                         100
                      Read Error Rate




                                        10− 1



                                        10− 2



                                        10− 3
                                                − 10.0 − 7.5   − 5.0    − 2.5 0.0       2.5     5.0   7.5   10.0
                                                                       Read Offset (Vref − Vth)


                                            Fig. 24. Read error rate vs. read offset (Vr ef − Vth ).


  Figure 25 shows the correlation between the read error rate and the total RBER in a flash page.
We observe that the read error rate is linearly correlated with the overall RBER. This is because,
when the RBER is high, the threshold voltage distributions of neighboring states overlap with each
other by a greater amount. This causes a larger number of cells to be close to the read reference
voltage value, increasing the probability that a read error occurs (see Figure 24).
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                          43


                                                   Measured     Linear Fit

                 Read Error Rate
                                   10− 4



                                   10− 5



                                   10− 6

                                           10− 6        10− 5      10− 4          10− 3        10− 2
                                                                   RBER


                                   Fig. 25. Relationship between the read error rate and the RBER.


  Insights. We are the first to discover and quantify the extent of read errors, and to show the
correlation of these errors with the RBER and with the read reference voltage. We conclude that
read errors are correlated with the read offset (i.e., Vr ef − Vth ) and the overall RBER of the flash
page.
   A.3.2 Read Disturb Errors. Read disturb errors occur when a read operation to one page in a
flash block may introduce errors in other, unread pages in the same block [5, 76] (see Section 2.2).
Read disturb errors are caused by the high pass-through voltage applied to cells in the unread
pages.
   To characterize read disturb errors, we first randomly select 11 flash blocks and wear out each
block to 10K P/E cycles by repeatedly erasing and programming pseudorandomly generated data
into each page of each block. Then, we program pseudorandomly-generated data to each page
of each flash block. To minimize the impact of other errors, especially retention errors due to
early retention loss, we wait until the data has a 2-day retention time before inducing read disturb.
This ensures that, according to our results in Section 4.3, after 2 days, retention loss has slowed
down and can only shift the threshold voltage by at most 1 voltage step during the relatively short
characterization process (∼9 h). To induce read disturb in the flash block, we repeatedly read from a
wordline within the block for up to 900K times (i.e., up to 900K read disturbs). During this process,
to characterize the read disturb effect, we obtain the RBER and threshold voltage distribution at ten
different read disturb counts from 0 to 900K.
   Observations. Figure 26 shows how the mean and standard deviation of the threshold voltage
distribution change with read disturb count. Each subfigure in the top row shows the mean for
a different state; each subfigure in the bottom row shows the standard deviation for a different
state. The blue dots shows the measured data; each orange line shows a linear trend line fitted
to the measured data. The x-axis shows the P/E cycle count; the y-axis shows the distribution
parameters in voltage steps. We make three observations from this figure. First, the read disturb
effect increases the mean threshold voltage of the ER state significantly, by ∼8 voltage steps after
900K read disturbs. In contrast, the mean threshold voltages of the programmed states change
by only a small amount (<3 voltage steps). The increase in the mean threshold voltage is lower
for a higher Vt h state. This is because the impact of read disturb is correlated with the difference
between the pass-through voltage (see Section 2.1) and the threshold voltage of a cell. When the
difference is larger (i.e., when the threshold voltage of a cell is lower), the impact of read disturb
increases. In fact, we observe that the threshold voltage distribution of the P3 state even shifts to
slightly lower voltage values during the experiment, because read disturb has little effect on cells in
44                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Y. Luo et al.

the P3 state, and the impact of retention loss dominates. Second, the distribution width of each
state (i.e., standard deviation) decreases slightly as the read disturb count increases, by <0.2 voltage
steps after 900K read disturbs. Third, the change in each distribution parameter can be modeled as
a linear function of the read disturb count (as shown by the orange dotted lines). This shows that
read disturb in 3D NAND flash memory follows a similar linear trend as that observed in planar
NAND flash memory by prior work [5].

                                            (a) ER Mean                                                    (b) P1 Mean                                                    (c) P2 Mean                                                    (d) P3 Mean
                                  24                                                            116
                                                                                                                                                               180                                                            246                Measured
                                  22                                                            114
                 Normalized Vth




                                                                               Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                                              Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Normalized Vth
                                                                                                                                                               178                                                            244                Linear Fit
                                  20                                                            112
                                                                                                                                                               176                                                            242
                                  18                                                            110
                                                                                                                                                               174                                                            240
                                  16                                                            108
                                                                                                                                                               172                                                            238
                                  14                                                            106
                                                                                                                                                               170                                                            236
                                  12                                                            104
                                        0   2    4   6    8 10                                         0   2    4   6    8 10                                         0   2    4   6    8 10                                         0   2    4   6    8 10
                                       Read Disturb Count (×105)                                      Read Disturb Count (×105)                                      Read Disturb Count (×105)                                      Read Disturb Count (×105)

                                            (e) ER Stdev                                                   (f) P1 Stdev                                                   (g) P2 Stdev                                                   (h) P3 Stdev
                                                                                                                                                   11.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11.35
                 18.65
Normalized Vth




                                                                   Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                                  Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Normalized Vth
                                                                                    11.35
                                                                                                                                                   11.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11.30
                 18.60
                                                                                    11.30
                                                                                                                                                   11.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11.25
                 18.55
                                                                                    11.25
                                                                                                                                                   10.95
                                        0   2    4   6    8 10                                         0   2    4   6    8 10                                         0   2    4   6    8 10                                         0   2    4   6    8 10
                                       Read Disturb Count (×105)                                      Read Disturb Count (×105)                                      Read Disturb Count (×105)                                      Read Disturb Count (×105)



Fig. 26. Mean and standard deviation of threshold voltage distribution of each state, vs. read disturb count.

   Figure 27 plots how RBER increases with read disturb count for a flash block that has endured
10K P/E cycles. The top graph breaks down the errors according to the change in cell state as a
result of the errors; the bottom graph breaks down the errors into MSB and LSB errors. We make
three observations from Figure 27. First, ER↔P1 errors increase significantly with read disturb
count, whereas P1↔P2 and P2↔P3 errors do not. This is because the ER state threshold voltage
distribution shifts significantly with read disturb count (see Figure 26), reducing the threshold
voltage difference between the ER and P1 states. Second, MSB errors increase much faster than LSB
errors with read disturb count because ER↔P1 errors are a type of MSB error, and they increase
significantly with read disturb count. Third, the increase in RBER with read disturb count follows a
linear trend (as shown by the dotted line in Figure 27b), which is similar to the observation made
for planar NAND flash memory by prior work [5].
   Figure 28 shows how the optimal read reference voltages change with read disturb count. The
three subfigures show the optimal voltages for Va , Vb , and Vc . We make two observations from this
figure. First, the optimal voltages for Vb and Vc change by relatively little as the read disturb count
increases (<3 voltage steps after 900K read disturbs), whereas the optimal Va changes more with
the read disturb count. This is because read disturb causes the threshold voltage distributions of
lower-voltage states to change by a greater amount, which requires the read reference voltages
separating the lower-voltage states (e.g., Va ) to change more. Second, the increase in the optimal Va
follows a linear trend with read disturb count, because the ER state threshold voltage distribution
shifts linearly (as we see from Figure 26).
   Insights. We compare the read disturb effect that we observe in 3D NAND flash memory to that
observed in planar NAND flash memory by prior work [5]. We make the observation that, although
RBER increases linearly with read disturb count in both 3D NAND and planar NAND flash memory,
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                                                     45


                                         3×10− 4

                                  RBER   2×10− 4

                                         1×10− 4                                            ER ↔ P1         P2 ↔ P3
                                                          (a)                               P1 ↔ P2
                                                0

                                         6×10− 4

                                         4×10− 4
                                  RBER




                                         2×10− 4                                                MSB         MSB Fit
                                                          (b)                                   LSB         LSB Fit
                                                0
                                                    0           2          4        6         8                   10
                                                                    Read Disturb Count (×105)


Fig. 27. RBER vs. read disturb count, broken down by (a) the state transition of each flash cell, and (b) MSB
or LSB page.


                                         (a) Optimal Va                 (b) Optimal Vb                    (c) Optimal Vc
                            78
                                                                                                                    Measured
                                                             144                                210
                                                                                                                    Linear Fit
                            76
           Normalized Vth




                                                             142                                208
                            74
                                                             140                                206
                            72
                                                             138                                204
                            70
                                 0   2    4    6     8  10          0   2    4    6     8  10         0   2    4    6     8  10
                                 Read Disturb Count (×105)          Read Disturb Count (×105)         Read Disturb Count (×105)



                                          Fig. 28. Optimal read reference voltages vs. read disturb count.



the slope of the increase (i.e., the sensitivity of the RBER to read disturb) at 10K P/E cycles is 96.7%
lower in 3D NAND flash memory than that in planar NAND flash memory [5]. We believe that this
difference in the sensitivity to read disturb effect is due to the use of a larger process technology
node (30–40 nm) in current 3D NAND flash memory. The comparable planar NAND flash memory
results from prior work are collected on 20–24 nm planar NAND flash memory devices [5]. We
expect the read disturb effect in 3D NAND flash memory to increase in the future as the process
technology node size shrinks. We conclude that the 96.7% reduction in the read disturb effect we
observe in 3D NAND flash memory compared to planar NAND flash memory is mainly caused
by the difference in manufacturing process technology nodes of the two types of NAND flash
memories.

A.4   Layer-to-Layer Process Variation
In this section, we present new results and analyses of the layer-to-layer process variation phenom-
enon in 3D NAND flash memory, in addition to the key findings we already presented in Section 4.2.
We use the same methodology as we describe in Section 4.2.
46                                                                                                                                                                                                          Y. Luo et al.

    Figure 29 shows how the threshold voltage distribution mean and standard deviation of each
state changes with layer number, for a flash block that has endured 10K P/E cycles. Each subfigure
in the top row shows the mean for a different state; each subfigure in the bottom row shows the
standard deviation for a different state. We make two observations from this figure. First, the ER
state threshold voltage increases by as much as 25 voltage steps as the layer number changes, while
the mean threshold voltages of the other three states do not vary by much. This is because the
threshold voltage of a cell in ER state is set after an erase operation, and the value it is set to is
a function of manufacturing process variation and of wearout. In contrast, the threshold voltage
of a cell in one of the other states (P1, P2, or P3) is set to a fixed target voltage value regardless of
process variation [3, 69, 89, 91] (see Section 2.1). Since only the voltage of the ER state is affected by
layer-to-layer process variation, only one of the read reference voltages, Va , changes with the layer
number, as we already observed in Figure 6. Second, the distribution widths of ER and P1 states
(i.e., their standard deviations) increase in the top layers, and decrease in the bottom layers. This
pattern is similar to the pattern of how the RBER changes with layer number, which we show in
Figure 5 (Section 4.2). A wider threshold voltage distribution increases the overlap of neighboring
distributions, leading to more errors in the top layer. However, the distribution widths of the P2 and
P3 states mainly decrease as layer number increases. Unfortunately, we are unable to completely
explain why mean threshold voltage and distribution width change differently with layer number
for different states because we do not have exact circuit-level information about layer-to-layer
process variation.

                                       (a) ER Mean                                           (b) P1 Mean                                           (c) P2 Mean                                           (d) P3 Mean
                             30                                                   130                                                                                                         270
            Normalized Vth




                                                                 Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                       Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                                                                             Normalized Vth


                             20                                                                                                         190
                                                                                  120                                                                                                         260


                             10                                                                                                         180
                                                                                  110                                                                                                         250


                              0                                                                                                         170
                                                                                  100                                                                                                         240
                                  0   25     50    75  100                              0   25     50    75  100                              0   25     50    75  100                              0   25     50    75  100
                                  Normalized Layer Number                               Normalized Layer Number                               Normalized Layer Number                               Normalized Layer Number

                                      (a) ER Stdev                                           (b) P1 Stdev                                          (c) P2 Stdev                                          (d) P3 Stdev
                 19.0                                                         12.5                                                  11.5
                                                                                                                                                                                          12.0
Normalized Vth




                                                             Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                   Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                                                                         Normalized Vth




                 18.5                                                         12.0                                                  11.0
                                                                                                                                                                                          11.5

                 18.0                                                         11.5                                                  10.5
                                                                                                                                                                                          11.0

                 17.5                                                         11.0                                                  10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                          10.5
                                  0   25     50    75  100                              0   25     50    75  100                              0   25     50    75  100                              0   25     50    75  100
                                  Normalized Layer Number                               Normalized Layer Number                               Normalized Layer Number                               Normalized Layer Number



Fig. 29. Mean and standard deviation of our Gaussian threshold voltage distribution model of each state,
versus layer number.


   We conclude that layer-to-layer process variation significantly impacts the threshold voltage
distribution and leads to large variations in RBER and optimal read reference voltages across layers.

A.5                               Bitline-to-Bitline Process Variation
We perform an analysis of the variation of RBER and threshold voltage distribution along the y-axis
(i.e., across groups of bitlines) for a flash block that has endured 10K P/E cycles. We use a similar
methodology to our layer-to-layer process variation experiments (see Section 4.2).
Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation in 3D NAND Flash Memory                                                                                                                                                47

   Figure 30 shows how the threshold voltage distribution mean and standard deviation of each
state changes with layer number, for a flash block that has endured 10K P/E cycles. Each subfigure
in the top row shows the mean for a different state; each subfigure in the bottom row shows the
standard deviation for a different state. Note that we normalize the number of bitlines from 0 to 100,
by multiplying the actual bitline number with a constant, to maintain the anonymity of the chip
vendors. We make two observations from this figure. First, the variations in mean threshold voltage
and the distribution width (i.e., standard deviation) are much smaller in this figure compared to
that observed in Figure 29 for layer-to-layer variation (Appendix A.4). This indicates that bitline-
to-bitline process variation is much smaller compared to layer-to-layer process variation in 3D
NAND flash memory. Second, we observe that the pattern of the mean threshold voltage repeats
periodically, for every 25 bitlines. We believe that this indicates a repetitive architecture in the way
that the 3D NAND flash memory chip is organized (for example, each block may be made up of
four arrays of flash cells that are connected together). Unfortunately, we cannot completely explain
this behavior without access to circuit-level design information that is proprietary to NAND flash
memory vendors.

                                       (a) ER Mean                                            (b) P1 Mean                                            (c) P2 Mean                                            (d) P3 Mean
                             20                                                    116                                                    185                                                    256
            Normalized Vth




                                                                  Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                         Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                                                                                Normalized Vth
                             19                                                    115                                                    184                                                    255


                             18                                                    114                                                    183                                                    254


                             17                                                    113                                                    182                                                    253


                             16                                                    112                                                    181                                                    252
                                  0   25     50     75  100                              0   25     50     75  100                              0   25     50     75  100                              0   25     50     75  100
                                  Normalized Bitline Number                              Normalized Bitline Number                              Normalized Bitline Number                              Normalized Bitline Number

                                       (a) ER Stdev                                           (b) P1 Stdev                                           (c) P2 Stdev                                           (d) P3 Stdev
                 20.4                                                          12.1                                                   11.0                                                   11.5
Normalized Vth




                                                              Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                     Normalized Vth




                                                                                                                                                                            Normalized Vth




                 20.3                                                          12.0                                                   10.9                                                   11.4


                 20.2                                                          11.9                                                   10.8                                                   11.3


                 20.1                                                          11.8                                                   10.7                                                   11.2


                 20.0                                                          11.7                                                   10.6                                                   11.1
                                  0   25     50     75  100                              0   25     50     75  100                              0   25     50     75  100                              0   25     50     75  100
                                  Normalized Bitline Number                              Normalized Bitline Number                              Normalized Bitline Number                              Normalized Bitline Number



Fig. 30. Mean and standard deviation of our Gaussian threshold voltage distribution model of each state,
versus bitline number.

   Figures 31 and 32 show how the RBER and optimal read reference voltages change with bitline
number, for a flash block that has endured 10K P/E cycles. We observe that neither RBER nor the
optimal read reference voltages change by much across bitlines. This indicates that the changes
that we observe in Figure 30 may not be significant enough to lead to variation in the reliability
of different bitlines. We conclude that bitline-to-bitline process variation is much smaller than
layer-to-layer process variation in 3D NAND flash memory.
48                                                                                                                            Y. Luo et al.

                                      4×10− 4
                                                                                                                   (a)
                                                         ER ↔ P1           P2 ↔ P3
                                      3×10− 4            P1 ↔ P2           Multi-bit
                               RBER
                                      2×10− 4

                                      1×10− 4

                                             0

                                      4×10− 4
                                                         LSB          MSB                                          (b)
                                      3×10− 4
                               RBER




                                      2×10− 4

                                      1×10− 4

                                             0
                                                  0            20        40          60       80                   100
                                                                    Normalized Bitline Number


Fig. 31. RBER vs. bitline number, broken down by (a) the state transition of each flash cell, and (b) MSB or
LSB page.

                                       (a) Optimal Va                    (b) Optimal Vb                    (c) Optimal Vc
                              81                               152                               219


                              80                               151                               218
             Normalized Vth




                              79                               150                               217


                              78                               149                               216


                              77                               148                               215
                                   0    25    50     75 100          0    25    50     75 100          0    25    50     75 100
                                   Normalized Bitline Number         Normalized Bitline Number         Normalized Bitline Number



                                          Fig. 32. Optimal read reference voltages vs. bitline number.
